# Collected quotations on the subject of relativity.
# 
# This is a structured file, amenable to programmatic manipulation.
# The format is meant to be as easy to type in as possible, with little or no needless repetition.
# There should be no tabs, and the encoding should be UTF-8.
# 
# Watch out for weird apostrophes! ' Do a mass-replace.
# 
# The hierarchy/structure is 
#  author > title > quote
# The author and quote are always present; the title level may be absent, in the case of 
# quotes that aren't referenced to a specific work. 
#
# The order of authors is arbitrary. 
#  
# Occasional special symbols:
#  pre(...) - preserve white space (poetry)
#  em(...) - emphasis/italics; this is poorly implemented! cross-talk with regular parens

Bergmann, P. {
 The Riddle of Gravitation (1968) {
   Although the general theory of relativity has explained a few minor discrepancies between astronomical observations and 
   Newtonian theory, its most important contribution to date has been a complete revolution of our notions of space and time, 
   a revolution that may not yet be completed.
   
   Mathematically, the physicist's search for laws that are the same for all observers is a search for Lorentz-invariant relationships.
   
   These two requirements - that the theory satisfy the requirement of general covariance, and that it approach 
   the laws of Newton under reasonable conditions - are sufficient to remove all ambiguities and to lead to a single possible law of gravitation.
   
   Reliance on the principle of general covariance drastically restricts the range of potential mathematical-geometric relations that might
   be considered as representing laws of gravitation.
   
   According to Einstein, the geometry of space-time does not lend itself to the selection of a special class of coordinate systems 
   for formulating the laws of nature, but all reasonably continuous and smooth coordinate systems will serve equally well.
   This formal principle is called the em(principle of general covariance).... In particular, it must be impossible to classify coordinate 
   systems into those in which the axes are straight lines and those in which the axes are curved.
   
   Einstein proposed foregoing all attempts to reinstate the role of inertial frames of reference. Locally, their role would have to 
   be taken over by the free-falling frames of reference, which, however, are not extensible. Among extended frames of reference, there 
   would be no hierarchy, no criteria for selecting a class of special or superior frames. All frames of reference were to be accepted 
   as equally valid.
   
   Only because of the flatness of the Minkowski universe is the state of motion of two physical objects with respect to each other well 
   defined regardless of the distance between them.
   
   The laws of gravitation must somehow restrict the curvature but without ruling out curvature altogether.
   
   The em(curvature) of the manifold itself is defined in terms of the change of direction that a vector suffers when transported 
   parallel about a small closed loop.
   
   The analogous formulation of the laws of conservation of energy (mass) and linear momentum requires introduction of the notions 
   of energy density, energy flux density, linear momentum density [proportional to energy flux density], and linear momentum flux density [stress]. 
  }
  Introduction to the Theory of Relativity (1942){
    While Maxwell's theory merely eliminated action at a distance from the realm of electrodynamics, the Lorentz transformation equations 
    ruled out action at a distance from the whole of physics by depriving space and time of their absolute character.
    
    The history of the general theory of relativity has shown that em(we have to consider the group of all continuous, differentiable coordinate 
    transformations with non-vanishing Jacobian) in order to develop a relativistic theory of gravitation.
    
    In a Riemannian space, the introduction of a Cartesian coordinate system is impossible.
    
    This non-linearity is characteristic of equations which are covariant with respect to general coordinate transformations; it is, 
    thus, a consequence of the equivalence principle.
    
    We must, therefore, assume that the gravitational fields (that is, the deviations of the actual metric from a flat metric) encountered 
    in celestial mechanics and elsewhere are so weak that the nonlinear character of the field equations leads only to secondary effects.
  }
}

Mermin, N. David {
 Space and Time in Special Relativity (1968) {
  ...teaching relativity is rather like conducting psychotherapy. It is not enough simply to state what is going on, for there 
  is an enormous amount of resistance to be broken down.
  
  ...misunderstanding is continually generated by commonplace, incorrect notions that are often implicit in the very language we use (a 
  pre-relativistic structure) and are therefore particularly difficult to recognize.
  
  The historical approach, though fascinating, provides an indirect and frequently confusing route to a clear statement of what 
  the modern theory says.
  
  Thus although light appears in a discussion of special relativity as the best-known example of something that moves with the 
  speed em(c), the interesting thing about the speed em(c) is em(not) that it is the speed of light.
  
  Language can be enormously confusing when it is used to discuss relativity, because words and even grammar often introduce physical 
  assumptions into what we say with such subtlety that we fail to realize that the assumptions are present.
 }
}

Eddington, A. {
 Space, Time and Gravitation (1920) {
  Now the most dangerous hypotheses are those which are tacit and unconscious.
  
  These differences are summed up in the statement that the geometry of space is Euclidean, but the geometry of space-time is 
  semi-Euclidean or "hyperbolic".
  
  It is not very profitable to speculate on the implication of the mysterious factor em(i), which seems to have the property 
  of turning time into space. It can scarcely be regarded as more than an analytical device.
  
  The division into past and future (a feature of time-order which has no analogy in space-order) is closely associated with our 
  ideas of causation and free-will.
  
  But the chief importance of the velocity of light is that no material body can exceed this velocity.
  
  He who doubts the reality of the four-dimensional world (for logical, as distinct from experimental, reasons) can only be 
  compared to a man who doubts the reality of the penny, and prefers to regard one of its innumerable appearances as the real object.
  
  ...gravitation acts not only on the molecules of matter, but on the undulations of light.
  
  It will be seen that the sensation of weight is not felt when we are free to respond to the force of gravitation; it is only 
  felt when something interferes to prevent our falling....It seems literally true to say that we never feel the 
  force of the earth's gravitation; what we do feel is the bombardment of the soles of our boots by the molecules of the ground, 
  and the consequent impulses spreading upwards through the body.
  
  Thus gravitation is removable locally, but centrifugal force can be removed everywhere.
  
  ...only certain kinds of space-time can occur in an empty region in nature. The law which determines what kinds can occur is the law 
  of gravitation... a restriction on the possible geometries of the world.
  
  It is remarkable that these slender laws [covariance and the limit of flat space-time distant from any matter] are
  sufficient to indicate almost uniquely a particular law.
  
  I prefer to think of matter and energy, not as agents causing the degrees of curvature of the world, but as parts of our perceptions 
  of the existence of the curvature.
  
  ...a curvature of the world we live in may give an illusion of an attractive force, and indeed can only be 
  discovered through some such effect.
  
  Gravity and inertia are one.
  
  The conservation of mass, of energy, and of momentum must all be contained implicitly in Einstein's law....It is a great triumph 
  for Einstein's theory that his law gives correctly these experimental principles, which have generally been regarded as unconnected with 
  gravitation.
  
  When continuous matter is admitted, em(any) kind of space-time becomes possible.
  
  Thus the four dimensions of the world bring about a four-fold arbitrariness of choice of mesh-system; this in turn necessitates four 
  identical relations between the G-mu-nu; and finally, in consequence of the law of gravitation, these identities reveal 
  four new facts or laws relating to the density, energy, momentum or stress of matter, summarised in the expressions K-mu-nu.
  These four laws turn out to be the laws of conservation of momentum and energy.
    
  In the relativity theory in particular [action] seems to be the most fundamental thing of all.
 }
 
 The Mathematical Theory of Relativity (1924) {
   But even so we have often puzzled ourselves needlessly over paradoxes, which disappear when we realise that the physical 
   quantities are not properties of certain external objects but are relations between these objects and something else.
   
   ...I want to set before you the treasure which has already been unearthed in this field.
   
   ...in our common outlook the idea of position or em(location) seems to be fundamental....The view which we are going to adopt
   reverses this. Extension (distance, interval) is now fundamental; and the location of the object is a computational result....
   To put the conclusion rather crudely - space is not a lot of points close together; it is a lot of distances interlocked.
   
   When we encounter em(i) in our investigations, we must remember that it has been introduced by our choice of measure-code, and must not 
   think of it as occurring with some mystical physical significance in the external world.
   
   When the g's are not constants and the fundamental quadratic form is not reducible to [a flat metric], there is still a null-surface, 
   given by em(ds=0)... which separates the timelike from the spacelike intervals.
   
   H. Weyl expresses this specialisation by saying that the world is 3+1 dimensional. Some entertainment may be derived by considering 
   the properties of a 2+2 or a 4+0 dimensional world.
   
   It may seem strange that we should be able to deduce the contraction of a material rod and the retardation of a material clock from the 
   general geometry of space and time. But it must be remembered that the contraction and retardation do not imply any absolute change in the 
   rod and clock. The "configuration of events" constituting the four-dimensional structure which we call a rod is unaltered; all that 
   happens is that the observer's space and time partitions cross it in a different direction. 
   
   When a number of phenomena are connected together it becomes somewhat arbitrary to decide which is to be regarded as the explanation of the 
   others.
   
   Covariance and contravariance are a kind of generalised dimension, showing how the measure of one condition of the world is changed when the
   measure of another condition is changed. The ordinary theory of change of units is merely an elementary case of this.
   
   Coordinates are the identification-numbers of the points of space-time.
 }
}

Bohm, David {
 The Special Theory of Relativity (1965){
   Throughout the book, a great deal of attention is paid quite generally to the habitual tendency to regard older modes of 
   thought as inevitable, a tendency that has greatly impeded the development of new ideas in science. This tendency is seen 
   to be based on the tacit assumption that scientific laws constitute absolute truths.
   
   This leads us to the (hyperbolic) geometry of Minkowski space-time...
   
   As in the case of our ideas about space, the problem with our common concept of time is evidently not that it is em(totally wrong).
   If it were, then nobody would be foolish enough to try to hold onto it. The difficulty arises because it is adequate in a limited domain,
   but inappropriate, as we shall see, when extended beyond this domain. But as a result of the fact that this domain of adequacy includes 
   a tremendous amount of common experience beginning with childhood, and because this experience has been incorporated into the structure 
   of the language, we find it very hard to get out of the habit of regarding our ordinary concept of time as inevitable.
   
   The interesting point is that the theory of relativity implies that a particle of zero rest mass can have a nonzero energy and momentum...
   Therefore, a body can have nonzero energy and momentum, even thought its rest mass is zero, em(if and only if it is moving at the speed of light).
   
   Rather, as in the case of relativity and quantum theory, it shows that, generally speaking, older ideas are on a 
   em(completely wrong track) when extended beyond their proper domains, and that radically new ideas are needed, which contradict old ones 
   while at the same time containing them, in some sense, as limiting cases and approximations.
   
   So although space and time can, to some extent, be transformed into each other in a change of reference frame, there are certain 
   limits on this transformation, in the sense that an interval inside the light cone cannot be transformed into one outside the light cone,
   or on the light cone.
   
   So a certain subtle kind of difference between space and time is preserved, in the sense of a lack of em(complete) interchangeability 
   under transformation....
 }
}

Landau and Lifshitz {
  The Classical Theory of Fields (1979){
    For the description of processes taking place in nature, one must have a em(system of reference). By a system of reference we 
    understand a system of coordinates serving to indicate the position of a particle in space, as well as clocks fixed in this system 
    serving to indicate the time. [First sentence.] 
    
    Experiment shows that the so-called em(principle of relativity) is valid. According to this principle all the laws of nature are 
    identical in all inertial systems of reference. In other words, the equations expressing the laws of nature are invariant with 
    respect to transformations of coordinates and time from one inertial system to another. This means that the equation describing 
    any law of nature, when written in terms of coordinates and time in different inertial reference systems, has one and the same form.
    
    The combination of the principle of relativity with the finiteness of the velocity of propagation of interactions is called 
    the em(principle of relativity of Einstein) (it was formulated by Einstein in 1905) in contrast to the principle of relativity of 
    Galileo, which was based on an infinite velocity of propagation of interactions.
    
    Thus the principle of relativity of Einstein introduces very drastic and fundamental changes in basic physical concepts. The notions of 
    space and time derived by us from our daily experiences are only approximations linked to the fact that in daily life we happen to 
    deal only with velocities which are very small compared to the velocity of light.
    
    It is frequently useful for reasons of presentation to use a fictitious four-dimensional space, on the axes of which are marked three
    space coordinates and the time.
    
    The form of expressions (2.3) and (2.4) permits us to regard the interval, from the formal point of view, as the distance between two 
    points in a fictitious four-dimensional space....
    
    Thus we arrive at a very important result: the interval between two events is the same in all inertial frames of reference, i.e. it is 
    invariant under transformation from one inertial system to another. This invariance is the mathematical expression of the constancy 
    of the velocity of light.
    
    We see that to compare the rates of clocks in two reference frames we require several clocks in one frame and one in the other, and that
    therefore this process is not symmetric with respect to the two systems. The clock that appears to lag is always the one which is 
    being compared with different clocks in the other system.
    
    Suppose that in a certain inertial reference system we observe clocks which are moving relative to us in an arbitrary manner.
    At each different moment of time this motion can be considered as uniform. Thus at each moment of time we can introduce a 
    coordinate system rigidly linked to the moving clocks, which with the clocks constitutes an inertial frame of reference. 
    
    On the other hand, the result of two Lorentz transformations does depend, in general, on their order....The sole exception 
    is the case of transformations with parallel vectors V1 and V2...
    
    We call attention to the fact that in relativistic mechanics the energy of a free body (i.e. the energy of any closed system) is a 
    completely definite quantity which is always positive and is directly related to the mass of the body. In this connection we recall 
    that in classical mechanics the energy of a body is defined only to within an arbitrary constant, and can be either positive or negative.
    
    Thus in relativistic mechanics the law of conservation of mass does not hold: the mass of a composite body is not equal to the sum of the masses 
    of its parts. Instead only the law of conservation of energy, in which the rest energies of the particles are included, is valid.
    
    We cannot speak of a direct interaction of particles located at a distance from one another. Interactions can occur at any one moment 
    only between neighboring points in space (contact interaction). Therefore we must speak of the interaction of one particle with 
    the field, and of the subsequent interaction of the field with the second particle.
    
    In the previous section it was shown that a noninertial system of reference is equivalent to a certain field of force.
    We now see that in relativistic mechanics, these fields are determined by the quantities g-ik. The same also applies to "actual" 
    gravitational fields. Any gravitational field is just a change in the metric of space-time, as determined by the quantities g-ik.
    This important fact means that the geometrical properties of space-time (its metric) are determined by physical phenomena, and are 
    not fixed properties of space and time. The theory of gravitational fields, constructed on the basis of the theory of relativity, is 
    called the general theory of relativity. It was established by Einstein (and finally formulated by him in 1916), and represents 
    probably the most beautiful of all existing physical theories. It was remarkable that it was developed by Einstein in a purely 
    deductive manner and only later was substantiated by astronomical observations.
    
    An "actual" gravitational field cannot be eliminated by any transformation of coordinates. In other words, in the presence of a 
    gravitational field space-time is such that the quantities g-ik determining the metric cannot, by any coordinate transformation, be 
    brought to their galilean values over all space. Such a space-time is said to be em(curved), in contrast to em(flat) space-time, where 
    such a reduction is possible.
    
    A change in the metric of space-time also means a change in the purely spatial metric. To a galilean g-ik in flat space-time, there 
    corresponds a euclidean geometry of space. In a gravitational field, the geometry of space becomes non-euclidean. This applies both 
    to "true" gravitational fields, in which space-time is "curved", as well as to fields resulting from the fact that the reference system 
    is non-inertial, which leave the space-time flat.
    
    This result essentially changes the very concept of a system of reference in the general theory of relativity, as compared to 
    its meaning in the special theory. In the latter we meant by a reference system a set of bodies at rest relative to one another 
    in unchanging relative positions. Such systems of bodies do not exist in the presence of a variable gravitational field, and for 
    the exact determination of the position of a particle in space we must, strictly speaking, have an infinite number of bodies which
    fill all the space like some sort of "medium". Such a system of bodies with arbitrarily running clocks fixed on them constitutes a 
    reference system in the general theory of relativity.
    
    In connection with the arbitrariness of the choice of reference system, the laws of nature must be written in the general theory 
    of relativity in a form which is appropriate to any four-dimensional system of coordinates (or, as one says, in covariant form).
    
    Thus, generally speaking, in the general theory of relativity the concept of a definite distance between bodies loses its meaning, remaining
    valid only for infinitesimal distances. The only case where the distance can be defined also over a finite domain is that in which 
    the g-ik do not depend on the time....
    
    Thus we arrive at the important conclusion that the requirements of relativistic invariance, as expressed by the tensor character of the 
    quantities Tik, automatically lead to a definite connection between the energy flux and the [momentum density]: the energy flux density is equal 
    to the [momentum density] multiplied by c-squared [typos in the text are corrected here].
      
  }
}

Taylor and Wheeler {
  Spacetime Physics (1996) {
    Any difference in the direction [of motion of a particle] in one local frame and that in a nearby frame is described in terms of 
    the "curvature of spacetime", Einstein tells us. The existence of this curvature destroys the possibility of describing motions 
    with respect to a single ideal Euclidean reference frame that pervades all space. What is simple is only the geometry in a region 
    small enough to look flat.
    
    Where does mass get its moving orders? Locally, answers Einstein. From a distance, answers Newton.
    
    To try to set up an all-encompassing Euclidean reference frame and attempt to refer motion to it is the wrong way to do physics.
    Don't try to describe motion relative to far away objects. em(Physics is simple only when analyzed locally.)
    
    What could be simpler than the moving orders for mass: "Follow a straight line in the local inertial reference frame."
    Does a satellite have to know the location of the earth and the moon and the sun before it knows how to move? Not at all... it only 
    has to sense the local structure of spacetime - right where it is - in order to follow the correct track.
    
    More sensitive apparatus detects the "tide-producing action" of gravity - the accelerating shortening of separations parallel to the earth's 
    surface, the accelerating lengthening of vertical separations.
    
    These relative accelerations are doubled when the separations are doubled.
    
    All this talk about the identity of "gravitational mass" and "inertial mass" completely obscures the truth. Curvature and nothing more 
    is all that is required to describe the increasing rate at which A and B approach each other.
    
    This effect is better described by the phrase "tidal field" than by the ambiguous phrase "gravitational field": "tidal" because the 
    em(relative) acceleration of water particles on opposite sides of the earth, caused by the moon, shows itself in tides.
    
    Some of the best minds of the twentieth century struggled with the concepts of relativity, not because nature is obscure, but simply 
    because man finds it difficult to outgrow established ways of looking at nature.
    
    The definition of an inertial frame requires that em(no gravitational fields will be felt in it).
    
    Inertial frames of reference are always em(local) ones, that is, inertial in a limited region of spacetime.
    
    As an example, consider a particle of mass 10 kilograms. A second and less massive particle placed one-tenth meter from it and 
    initially at rest will, in less than three minutes, undergo a displacement of 1 millimeter.
    
    em(All the laws of physics are the same in every inertial reference frame.) We call this statement the em(principle of relativity).... Both 
    the em(form) of the laws of physics and the em(numerical values of the physical constants) that these laws contain are the 
    same in every inertial reference frame.... Expressed in negative terms, the principle of relativity says that em(the laws of physics 
    cannot provide a way to distinguish one inertial reference frame from another)....
    
    Physical values differ in em(value) between the two frames but fulfill identical em(laws).
    
    Think of constructing a frame by assembling meter sticks into a cubical latticework similar to the "jungle gym" seen on playgrounds.
    At every intersection of this latticework fix a clock.
    
    In relativity we often speak about "the observer". Where is this observer? At one place or all over the place?
    em(The word "observer" is a shorthand way of speaking about the whole collection of recording clocks) associated with one 
    inertial frame of reference. No one real observer could easily do what we ask of the "ideal observer" in our analysis of relativity.
    So it is best to think of the observer as the man who goes around picking up the punched cards turned out by all the recording 
    clocks in his employ. This is the sophisticated sense in which we will be hereafter using the phrase "the observer finds such and such."
    
    em(Proper time) is to a world line in Lorentz geometry what length is to a path in Euclidean geometry.
    
    Today we have learned not to overstate Minkowski's argument. It is right to say that time and space are inseparable parts of a larger unity.
    It is wrong to say that time is identical in quality with space.
    
    The portion "variant" of the adjective "covariant" indicates that the coordinates vary from one reference system to another.
    The prefix "co" implies a coordinated variation of the coordinates of all events according to the same law.
    
    The em(4-vector) that leads from A to B is the unifying idea. The components of this 4-vector, the displacements em(dx), em(dy), 
    em(dz), and em(dt)....
    
    Does Einstein's statement that mass and energy are equivalent mean that energy is the em(same) as mass? No.... The distinction 
    between mass and energy is this: mass measures the magnitude of a 4-vector and energy measures the time component
    of the em(same) 4-vector.
    
    The concept of "relativistic mass" is subject to misunderstanding and is not used here.
   }
   Exploring Black Holes (2000) {
     Concepts useful in exploring the very fast help us to examine spacetime near very massive objects.
     
     In relativity every invariant quantity is a diamond, to be treasured.
     
     # tau for times, sigma for distances; reverse sign of metric expression
     
     Principle of Extremal Aging: The path a free object takes between two events in spacetime is the path for which
     the time lapse between events, recorded on the object's wristwatch, is an extremum. [Some cases are a saddle point. He refers to maxima and saddle points as extremal.]
     
     Particle mass em(m) is an em(invariant), independent of reference frame....
     
     Both space and time enter into the specification of the limiting dimensions of a free-float frame. Therefore - for a given
     sensitivity of the measuring devices - a reference frame is free-float only within a limited region of em(spacetime).
     
     There are many valid ways to synchronize clocks. Here is one: Pick one clock as the standard, the reference clock. At 
     midnight the reference clock sends out a synchronizing flash of light in all directions. Prior to emission of the 
     synchronizing flash, every other clock in the lattice has been stopped and set to a time...later than midnight 
     equal to the straight-line distance...of that clock from the reference clock. Each clock is then started when
     it receives the reference flash. 
     
     The lattice clocks, when installed by a foresighted experimenter, will be recording clocks. Each clock is able to detect the 
     occurrence of an event (collision, passage of light flash or particle). Each reads into its memory the nature of the event, the 
     time of the event, and the location of the clock. The memory of all the clocks can then be read out and analyzed later at some 
     command center.
     
     For spacetime near nonrotating Earth or black hole, the task of binding together individual localized free-float frames is 
     carried out by the Schwarzschild metric....
     
     Describe an object with a table of distances between points. Describe spacetime with a table of intervals between events.
     
     Spacetime geometry exists - and can be described - even when no frame of reference is used at all!
     
     People who use general relativity as a tool change reference frames more often than they change clothes.
     
     The constant, ever-present "force of gravity" that we experience on Earth is gone, eliminated as we step into a free-float frame. 
     What remains of "gravity"? Only curvature of spacetime remains. What is this curvature? Nothing but tidal acceleration. Curvature 
     is tidal acceleration and tidal acceleration is curvature. 
     
     When, instead, the separation between the two events is spacelike, that is, when the space part of the separation predominates 
     over the time part, we reverse the signs of the terms [of tau-squared, the square of the timelike spacetime interval] 
     to keep the combination positive.
     
     The r-coordinate is em(defined) so that 2pi*r is the measured distance around a circle centered on the attracting mass; hence 
     its name, em(reduced circumference).
     
     The time t is called em(far-away time) and is measured on clocks far away from the center of attraction...
     
     The wonderful thing about a black hole is that it has no surface, no structure, and no matter with which one will collide.
     A test particle can explore em(all) of spacetime around a black hole without bumping into the surface - since there is 
     no surface at all.
     
     A singularity is a em(nobody knows) phenomenon....The truth is, nobody has figured it out yet! No one has developed a theory 
     of quantum gravity that combines quantum mechanics with general relativity.
     
     In general relativity, every coordinate system is partial and limited, correctly representing one or another feature of 
     curved spacetime and misrepresenting other features. Figures and diagrams that display these coordinate systems embody the 
     same combination of clarity and distortion.
     
     These figures embed curved-space geometry in the flat Euclidean three-space geometry perspective shown on the printed page.
     Therefore these figures are called embedding diagrams.
     But flat Euclidean geometry is em(not) curved space geometry.
     Therefore we expect embedding diagrams to misrepresent cuved space in some ways. They lie!
     
     The metric is a "four-dimensional micrometer" for measuring the small spacetime separation between a chosen pair of events.
     You em(own) the metric. You em(choose) the events whose separation you wish to measure with the metric. 
     The "metric micrometer" translates bookkeeper coordinate increments ... into proper time or proper distance between the pairs
     of events em(you) choose.
     
     Moreover, the shell observer and a passing free-float observer can use the Lorentz transformation of special relativity to 
     exchange data on local events that are close together in spacetime. We shall use this ability to exchange data many times...
     
     The strength of bookkeeper coordinates is universality; their weakness is isolation of most data entries from direct experience.
     In contrast, people can, in principle, live and work in free-float frames and on spherical shells, taking and analyzing data as if 
     they were in flat spacetime, but unfortunately they can do so only for limited patches of spacetime.
     
     The Schwarzschild metric is central in the translation of coordinates back and forth between direct observers (shell observers 
     and free-float observers) and between each of these observers and the Schwarzschild bookkeeper.
     
     "Go straight!" spacetime shouts at the stone. The stone's wristwatch verifies that its path is straight.
     
     Spacetime shouts, "Go straight!" The free stone obeys. What does "straight" mean? Straight with respect to what? We 
     know the answer: The path of the stone is straight in a free-float frame. 
     
     Nature's command to the stone in its general form is "em(Follow a straight worldline in a local inertial frame.)" No 
     description could be simpler.
     
     On the theory side, Einstein says that you can do away entirely with Newton's gravitational force, substituting instead the 
     idea of geodesic: A free test particle moves along a worldline em(straight) in em(spacetime) as described with respect to every
     em(local) frame through which it passes. But the result may be a path em(curved) in em(space) as described by 
     em(global) Schwarzschild coordinates.
     
     General relativity stitches together the quilt squares of local free-float frames into a full quilt that covers wide regions of spacetime.
     
     Einstein's account of motion in curved spacetime recognizes no such distinction [between potential energy and kinetic energy].
     This new outlook presents us with a new unity. Energy associated with speed, energy associated with location, and energy associated 
     with mass are stirred together inextricably into a greater and simpler whole.
     
     In summary, for a radically plunging object that starts from rest at infinity, the principle of constancy of energy tells us that the 
     inward speed measured by shell observers increases steadily for smaller values of r, rising to the speed of light at the horizon. In
     contrast, the inward speed of the object drops to zero at the horizon when reckoned from the accounts of the Schwarzschild 
     bookkeeper.
     
     Unless we get quite close to it, a black hole will no more grab us than Sun grabs Earth.
     
     ...for orbits that stay at radii greater than about [150 times the Schwarzschild radius], Newtonian mechanics predicts the motion 
     to a good approximation.
     
     The same irresistible collapse forbids any stationary structure or object inside the horizon.
     
     Inside [the event horizon] there is an interchange of the character of the t-coordinate and the r-coordinate.
     
     A maximum of 15 microseconds does not seem long to live when we fall into a black hole [i.e., from the event horizon to the singularity].
     
     The selected black hole is an old one, so we presume that the sea of gravitational waves trapped inside the horizon at its formation
     will have died away.
     
     According to their theory, as a plunging observer approaches the center point, spacetime oscillates chaotically, squeezing and stretching the 
     poor traveler in random directions like an electric mixer...
     
     Extremal aging implies that energy and angular momentum are constants of the motion.
     
   } 
 }
  
Hawking and Ellis {
   The Large-Scale Structure of Space-Time {
   
     # 'matter' means any non-gravitational source, including electromagnetic fields
     
     This theory leads to two remarkable predictions about the universe: first, that the final fate of massive starts is to 
     collapse behind an event horizon to form a 'black hole' which will contain a singularity; and secondly, that there is a 
     singularity in our past which constitutes, in some sense, a beginning to the universe.
     
     The view of physics that is most generally accepted at the moment is that one can divide the discussion of the universe into two parts.
     First, there is the question of the local laws satisfied by the various physical fields. These are usually expressed in the form of 
     differential equations. Secondly, there is the problem of the boundary conditions for these equations, and the global nature of 
     their solutions. This involves thinking about the edge of space-time in some sense. These two parts may not be independent.
     Indeed it has been held that the local laws are determined by the large-scale structure of the universe. This view is generally 
     connected with the name of Mach....
     
     In fact most of our results will be independent of the detailed nature of the physical laws, but will merely involve certain general 
     properties such as description of space-time by a pseudo-Riemannian geometry and the positive definiteness of energy density.
     
     One can think of a singularity as a place where our present laws of physics break down. Alternatively, one can think of it as 
     representing part of the edge of space-time, but a part which is at a finite distance instead of at infinity. On this view, 
     singularities are not so bad, but one still has the problem of the boundary conditions. In other words, one does not know what will 
     come out of the singularity.
     
     In chapter 3 a formulation of the General Theory of Relativity is given in terms of three postulates about a mathematical model for 
     space-time. This model is a manifold M with a metric g of Lorentz signature. The physical significance of the metric is given by the 
     first two postulates: those of local causality and of local conservation of energy-momentum.... The third postulate, the field 
     equations for the metric.... 
     
     The curvature can be interpreted as a differential or tidal force which induces relative accelerations between neighbouring geodesics.
     If the energy-momentum tensor satisfies certain positive definite conditions, this differential force always has a net converging effect 
     on non-rotating families of geodesics. One can show by use of Raychaudhuri's equation that this then leads to focal or conjugate points 
     where neighbouring geodesics intersect.
     
     For a long time it was thought that these singularities might simply be a result of the high degree of symmetry, and would not be 
     present in more realistic models. It will be one of our main objects to show that this is not the case.
     
     The causal structure of space-time can be used to define a boundary or edge to space-time. This boundary represents both infinity 
     and the part of the edge of space-time which is at a finite distance, i.e. the singular points.
     
     The space-time structure discussed in the next chapter, and assumed through the rest of this book, is that of a manifold with a Lorentz 
     metric and associated affine connection.
     
     A manifold is essentially a space which is locally similar to Euclidean space in that it can be covered by coordinate patches.
     This structure permits differentiation to be defined, but does not distinguish intrinsically between different coordinate systems.
     Thus the only concepts defined by the manifold structure are those which are independent of the choice of a coordinate system.
     
     The definition of a manifold given so far is very general. For most purposes one will impose two further conditions, that M is Hausdorff and that 
     M is paracompact, which will ensure reasonable local behaviour.   
     
     Unless otherwise stated, all manifolds considered will be paracompact, connected C-infinite Hausdorff manifolds without boundary.
     It will turn out later that when we have imposed some additional structure on M (the existence of an affine connection) the requirement 
     of paracompactness will be automatically satisfied because of the other restrictions.
     
     The mathematical model we shall use for space-time, i.e. the collection of all events, is a pair (M,g) where M is a connected 
     four-dimensional Hausdorff C-infinite manifold and g is a Lorentz metric (i.e. metric of signature +2) on M.
     
     Strictly speaking then, the model for space-time is not just one pair (M,g) but a whole equivalence class of all pairs (M', g')
     which are equivalent to (M,g). 
     
     The manifold M is taken to be connected since we would have no knowledge of any disconnected component. It is taken to be 
     Hausdorff since this seems to accord with normal experience. However in chapter 5 we shall consider an example in which one might
     dispense with this condition. Together with the existence of a Lorentz metric, the Hausdorff condition implies that M is paracompact.
     
     In fact, the order of differentiability of the metric is probably not physically significant. Since one can never measure the metric exactly,
     but only with some margin of error, one could never determine that there was an actual discontinuity in its derivatives of any order.
     Thus one can always represent one's measurements by a C-infinite metric.
     
     There will be various fields on M, such as the electromagnetic field, the neutrino field, etc., which describe the matter content of space-time.
     These fields will obey equations which can be expressed as relations between tensors on M in which all derivatives with respect to position 
     are covariant derivatives with respect to the symmetric connection defined by the metric g. This is so because the only relations 
     defined on a manifold structure are tensor relations, and the only connection defined so far is that given by the metric.
     
     [Postulate of local causality:] The equations governing the matter fields must be such that if U is a convex normal neighborhood and p and q 
     are points in U then a signal can be sent in U between p and q if and only if p and q can be joined by a C1 curve lying entirely in U, whose 
     tangent vector is everywhere non-zero and is either timelike or null; we call such a curve, em(non-spacelike).
     
     Thus by observing which points can communicate with p, one can determine the null cone Np in Tp [the tangent space at p].
     Once Np is known, the metric at p may be determined up to a conformal factor.
     
     The conformal factor in the metric may be determined using postulate (b) below [local conservation of energy and momentum]; thus all 
     the elements of the theory will be physically observable.
     
     One might think that one could include gravitation by keeping the metric flat and by introducing an extra field on space-time.
     However, experiments have shown that light rays travelling near the sun are deflected. Since light rays are geodesics, this shows that
     the space-time metric cannot be flat or even conformal to a flat metric. 
     
     These equations should be tensor equations involving the matter only through its energy-momentum tensor, i.e. should not distinguish between
     two different matter fields which have the same distribution of energy and momentum.
     
     ...the pressure contributes to the total mass. This means that in some circumstances it can actually assist rather than prevent gravitational collapse.
     
     # There's a second form of the field equations with only Rab = appearing on the left hand side, and with two terms in Tab and T appearing on the right.
     
     Thus the field equations really provide only six independent differential equations for the metric [16->10->6].
     This is in fact the correct number of equations to determine the space-time, since four of the ten components of the metric can be given arbitrary 
     values by use of the four degrees of freedom to make coordinate transformations....The field equations should define the metric only up to an 
     equivalence class under diffeomorphisms, and there are four degrees of freedom to make diffeomorphisms.
     
     This theory in which the metric is restricted to be conformally flat is known as the Nordstrom theory. It can be reformulated as a theory in which 
     the metric is the flat metric and in which the gravitational interaction is represented by an additional scalar field.
     As mentioned before, this sort of theory would be inconsistent with the observed deflection of light by massive objects, and it would not account 
     for the measured advance in the perihelion of Mercury.
     
     It is [the postulate of local causality] which sets the metric g apart from other fields on M and gives it its distinctive geometrical character.
     
     Physically it would seem reasonable to suppose that there is a local thermodynamic arrow of time defined continuously at every point of space-time,
     but we shall only require that it should be possible to define continuously a division of non-spacelike vectors into two classes, which we 
     arbitrarily label future- and past-directed. If this is the case, we shall say that space-time is time-orientable. In some space-times 
     it is not possible to define such a time-orientation [e.g. de Sitter space]. If a space-time (M,g) is not time-orientable, then it has a 
     double covering space which is.
     
     One may also ask whether space-time is em(space-orientable), that is whether it is possible to divide bases of three spacelike axes into right
     handed and left handed bases in a continuous manner.
     
     In particular if one assumes that space-time is time-orientable then it must also be space-orientable. (This in fact follows on using the 
     experimental evidence alone without appealing to the CPT theorem.)
     
     This example, incidentally, illustrates a useful technique for constructing space-times with given causal properties: one starts
     with some simple space-time (unless otherwise indicated this will be Minkowski space), cuts out any closed set and, if desired, pastes it 
     together in an appropriate way (i.e. one makes identifications of points of M). The result is still a manifold with a Lorentz metric and 
     therefore still a space-time even though it may look rather incomplete where points have been cut out. As mentioned above, however, this 
     incompleteness can be cured by an appropriate conformal transformation which sends the cut out points to infinity.
     
     ...one would be much more ready to believe that space-time satisfies what we shall call the chronology condition: namely, that there are no closed
     timelike curves. One must however bear in mind the possibility that there might be points (maybe where the density or curvature was very high)
     of space-time at which this condition does not hold. The set of all such points will be called the em(chronology violating) set of M...
     
     If M is compact, the chronology-violating set of M is non-empty....From this result it would seem reasonable to assume that space-time is 
     non-compact. Another argument against compactness is that any compact, four-dimensional manifold on which there is a Lorentz metric cannot 
     be simply connected.
     
     We shall say that the em(causality condition) holds if there are no closed non-spacelike curves.
     
     The em(strong causality condition) is said to hold at em(p) if every neighborhood of em(p) contains a neighborhood of em(p) which no 
     non-spacelike curve intersects more than once. 
     
     A set N is said to be globally hyperbolic if the strong causality assumption holds on N and if for any two points p,q in N, 
     J+(p)intersectJ-(q) is compact and contained in N. In a sense this can be thought of as saying that J+(p)intersectJ-(q) does not 
     contain any points on the edge of space-time, i.e. at infinity or a singularity.
     
     Thus if the whole of space-time were globally hyperbolic, i.e. if there were a global Cauchy surface, its topology would be very dull.
     
     The importance of global hyperbolicity for chapter 8 lies in the following result [the existence of geodesics]: Let p and q lie in a 
     globally hyperbolic set N with q in J+(p). Then there is a non-spacelike geodesic from p to q whose length is greater than or equal 
     to that of any other non-spacelike curve from p to q.
     
     The Einstein equations are em(non-linear). Actually in this respect they are not so different from other fields, for while the electromagnetic 
     field, the scalar field, etc., em(by themselves) obey linear equations in a given space-time, they form a non-linear system when their 
     mutual interactions are taken into account. The distinctive feature of the gravitational field is that it is em(self-interacting): it is 
     non-linear even in the absence of other fields. This is because it defines the space-time over which it propagates. To obtain a solution of the
     non-linear equations one employs an iterative method on approximate linear equations whose solutions are shown to converge in a certain 
     neighbourhood of the initial surface.
     
     Thus the solutions of the field equations can be unique only up to a diffeomorphism.
     In order to obtain a definite member of the equivalence class of metrics which represents a space-time, one introduces a fixed 'background' metric
     and imposes four 'gauge conditions' on the covariant derivatives of the physical metric with respect to the background metric. These 
     conditions remove the four degrees of freedom to make diffeomorphisms and lead to a unique solution for the metric components. They are analogous 
     to the Lorentz condition which is imposed to remove the gauge freedom for the electromagnetic field.
     
     We adopt b-incompleteness, a generalization of the idea of geodesic incompleteness, as an indication that singular points have been cut out 
     of space-time, and characterize two possible ways in which b-incompleteness can be associated with some form of curvature singularity.
     
     We also show that there is not only one incomplete geodesic, but a three-parameter family of them. In [section] 8.5 we discuss the situation 
     in which the incomplete curves are totally or partially imprisoned in a compact region of space-time. This is shown to be related to 
     non-Hausdorff behaviour of the b-boundary. We show that in a generic space-time, an observer travelling on one of these incomplete curves
     would experience infinite curvature forces.
     
     Timelike geodesic incompleteness has an immediate physical significance in that it presents the possibility that there could be freely 
     moving observers or particles whose histories did not exist after (or before) a finite interval of proper time. This would appear to be an 
     even more objectionable feature than infinite curvature and so it seems appropriate to regard such a space as singular....one should probably 
     also regard a null geodesically incomplete space-time as singular....    
     As nothing moves on spacelike curves, the significance of spacelike geodesic incompleteness is not so clear.  
     We shall therefore adopt the view that em(timelike and null geodesic completeness are minimum conditions for space-time to be considered 
     singularity-free). Therefore if a space-time is timelike or null geodesically complete, we shall say that it has a singularity.
     
     However, the class of timelike and/or null incomplete space-times does not include all those one might wish to consider as singular in some sense.
     For example Geroch (1968b) has constructed a space-time which is geodesically complete but which contains an inextendible timelike curve 
     of bounded acceleration and finite length. An observer with a suitable rocketship and a finite amount of fuel could traverse this curve.
     After a finite interval of time he would no longer be represented by a point of the space-time manifold. If one is going to say that there is a 
     singularity in a space-time in which a freely falling observer comes to an untimely end, one should presumably do the same for an observer 
     in a rocketship.
     
     One feels intuitively that a singularity ought to involve the curvature becoming unboundedly large near a singular point. 
     However since we have excluded singular points from our definition of space-time, difficulty arises in defining both 'near' and 
     'unboundedly large'.
     
     Such results, although suggestive, do not necessarily have any physical significance because they depend on the symmetry being exact 
     and clearly in any physical situation this will not be the case. It was therefore suggested by a number of authors that singularities 
     were simply the result of symmetries and that they would not occur in general solutions.
     
     What is needed is a prescription for attaching some sort of boundary [del] to M which is uniquely determined by measurements at non-singular 
     points, i.e. by the structure of (M,g).
     
     ...we interpret the preceding theorems as indicating not that geodesic incompleteness necessarily occurs, but that General Relativity breaks 
     down in very strong gravitational fields.
     
     In this chapter we consider the effect of space-time curvature on families of timelike and null curves. These could represent flow lines of 
     fluids or the histories of photons.
     
     In [section] 4.3 we discuss the general inequalities on the energy-momentum tensor which imply that the gravitational effect of matter is 
     always to tend to cause convergence of timelike and null curves.
     
     However, in general, space-time will not have any Killing vectors. Thus one will not have any special frame against which to measure acceleration;
     the best one can do is to take two bodies close together and measure their relative acceleration. This will enable one to measure the gradient 
     of the gravitational field. If one thinks of the metric as being analogous to the Newtonian potential, the gradient of the Newtonian field would 
     correspond to the second derivative of the metric. These are described by the Riemann tensor.
     
     The effect of this 'tidal force' term can be seen, for example, by considering a sphere of particles falling freely towards the earth. Each 
     particle moves on a straight line through the centre of the earth but those nearer the earth fall faster than those further away. This means that 
     the sphere does not remain a sphere but is distorted into an ellipsoid with the same volume.
     
     Thus the Weyl tensor is that part of the curvature which is not determined locally by the matter distribution.    
     
     In fact, one has little idea of the behaviour of matter under extreme conditions of density and pressure. Thus it might seem that one has 
     little hope of predicting the occurrence of singularities in the universe from the Einstein equations as one does not know the right-hand 
     side of the equations. However there are certain inequalities which it is physically reasonable to assume for the energy-momentum tensor.
     ...It turns out that in many circumstances these are sufficient to prove the occurrence of singularities, independent of the exact form 
     of the energy-momentum tensor.
     
     [The weak energy condition] is equivalent to saying that the energy density as measured by any observer is non-negative. This would seem very 
     reasonable physically.
     
     [The dominant energy condition] may be interpreted as saying that to any observer the local energy density appears non-negative and the local 
     energy flow vector is non-spacelike....In other words, the dominant energy condition is the weak energy condition with the additional 
     requirement that the pressure should not exceed the energy density. This holds for all known forms of matter and there is in fact good reason 
     for believing that this should be the case in all situations.
     
     Since any Cauchy surface intersects all timelike and null geodesics...
     
     We shall mean by an exact solution of Einstein's field equations, a space-time (M,g) in which the field equations are 
     satisfied with Tab the energy-momentum tensor of some specified form of matter which obeys postulate (a) ('local causality') of 
     chapter 3, and one of the energy conditions of chapter [section] 4.3. In particular, one may look for exact solutions for 
     empty space..., for an electromagnetic field..., for a perfect fluid..., or for a space containing an electromagnetic 
     field and a perfect fluid. Because of the complexity of the field equations, one cannot find exact solutions except in spaces of rather 
     high symmetry. Exact solutions are also idealized in that any region of space-time is likely to contain many forms of matter, 
     while one can obtain exact solutions only for rather simple matter content. Nevertheless, exact solutions give an idea of 
     the qualitative features that can arise in General Relativity, and so of possible  properties of realistic solutions of the field 
     equations.
     
     ...the set of all space-times, that is, all non-compact four-dimensional manifolds and all Lorentz metrics on them.
     
     In this chapter, we shall show that stars of more than about 1.5 times the solar mass should collapse when they have exhausted their nuclear fuel.
     If the initial conditions are not too asymmetric, the conditions of theorem 2 should be satisfied and so there should be a singularity.
     This singularity is however probably hidden from the view of an external observer who sees only a 'black hole' where the star once was.
     We derive a number of properties of such black holes, and show that they probably  settle down finally to a Kerr solution.
     
     In [section] 9.1 we discuss stellar collapse, showing how one would expect a closed trapped surface to form around any sufficiently large
     spherical star at a late stage in its evolution. In [section] 9.2 we discuss the event horizon which seems likely to form around such a 
     collapsing body. In [section] 9.3 we consider the final stationary state to which the solution outside the horizon settles down.
     This seems to be likely to be one of the Kerr family of solutions. Assuming that this is the case, one can place certain limits on the amount 
     of energy which can be extracted from such solutions.
     
     However the point is that even if the star is not exactly spherically symmetric, a closed trapped surface will still occur providing the departures
     from spherical symmetry are not too great. This follows from the stability of the Cauchy development proved in [section] 7.5....
     
     Another way of seeing this is that if L=m^2 and anguluar momentum is conserved during the collapse, then the velocity of the surface of the star
     would be about the velocity of light when the star was at its Schwarzschild radius. Now many stars have an angular momentum greater than the 
     square of their mass (for the sun, L~m^2). However it seems reasonable to expect some loss of angular momentum during the collapse 
     because of braking by magnetic fields and because of gravitational radiation. The situation is therefore that in some stars, and probably most,
     angular momentum would not prevent occurrence of closed trapped surfaces, and hence a singularity.
     
     Thus a star containing somewhat more than [so many] nucleons will not reach nuclear densities until it is already inside its Schwarzschild radius.
     
     This example also shows that the conditions when a body passes through its Schwarzschild radius need not be in any way extreme.
     
     The most striking feature of spherically symmetric collapse is that the singularity occurs within the region r<2m, from which no light can 
     escape to infinity. Thus if one remained outside r=2m one would never see the singularity predicted by theorem 2. Further the breakdown of 
     physical theory which occurs at the singularity cannot affect one's ability to predict the future in the asymptotically flat region of space-time.
     
     By [section] 6.3 the event horizon is an achronal boundary which is generated by null geodesic segments which may have past endpoints but which can have 
     no future endpoints.
     
     ...the following result shows that black holes can never bifurcate.
     
     Once the surface of the star has passed inside the event horizon, the metric of the exterior region is that of the Schwarzschild solution, 
     and is unaffected by the fate of the star. 
     
     That is, a partial Cauchy surface is a spacelike hypersurface which no non-spacelike curve intersects more than once.
     
     That is, a Cauchy surface is a spacelike hypersurface which every non-spacelike curve intersects exactly once.
     
     Being a Cauchy surface is a property not only of the surface itself but also of the whole space-time in which it is imbedded. 
     For example, if one cuts a single point out of Minkowski space, the resultant space-time admits no Cauchy surface at all.
     
     If there were a Cauchy surface for M, one could predict the state of the universe at any time in the past or future if one knew the relevant data 
     on the surface. However one could not know the data unless one was to the future of every point on the surface, which would be impossible in 
     most cases. There does not seem to be any physically compelling reason for believing tha the universe admits a Cauchy surface; in fact
     there are a number of known exact solutions of the Einstein field equations which do not, among them the anti-de Sitter space, plane waves,
     Taub-NUT space and Reissner-Nordstrom solution, all described in chapter 5. 
     
        
     
   }
}
  
Penrose, Roger {
   The Road to Reality (2004) {
     However, a vector space is itself a very special type of space, and something much more general is needed for the mathematics of 
     much of modern physics. Even Euclid's ancient geometry is not a vector space, because a vector space has to have a particular 
     distinguished point, namely the em(origin) (given by the zero vector), whereas in Euclidean geometry every point is on an equal 
     footing. In fact, Euclidean space is an example of what is called an em(affine) space. An affine space is much like a vector space 
     but we 'forget' the origin....
     
     In certain respects, the null cones are indeed more fundamental than the metric.
     
     Many workers in the field prefer to concentrate on the (+++-)-signature pseudometric ... since this is convenient when considering 
     spatial geometry, the quantity represented above as 'dl^2' being positive for spacelike displacements.... But the quantity 
     'ds^2' defined by the (+---)-signature ... is more directly physical, because it is positive along the timelike curves that are 
     the allowable worldlines of massive particles, the integral of ds being interpretable as the actual physical time measured by an 
     ideal clock with this as its world line.
     
     Groups that possess no non-trivial normal subgroups at all are called simple groups. The group SO(3) is an example of a simple group.
     Simple groups are, in a clear sense, the basic building blocks of group theory.
      
     It is thus an important achievement of the 19th and 20th centuries in mathematics that all the finite groups and all the continuous 
     groups are now known.
     
     Many of the groups that feature in particle physics are in fact product groups of simple groups (or elementary modifications of such).
     
     Those linear transformations which map the entire vector space down to a region (subspace) of smaller dimension within that space are 
     called singular.
     
     Any (adequate) system of coordinates will do. They need not be 'Cartesian' or of any other standard kind. This is the beauty of the 
     Lagrangian (and also Hamiltonian) approach. The choice of coordinates is governed merely by convenience.
     
     Moreover, the quantum versions of Hamiltonians provide essential ingredients for the standard [non-relativistic] quantum formalism.
     In the case of relativistic quantum theory, however, it is the Lagrangian framework that has generally been found to provide the 
     more natural leaping-off point.
     
     To exemplify the limitations of Noether's theorem in the case of gravitational theory, it should be pointed out that a significant 
     question mark still hangs over the issue of angular momentum in general relativity, even in the case of asymptotically flat spacetimes.
     
     Lagrangians for fields are undoubtedly extremely useful as mathematical devices, and they enable us to write down large numbers of suggestions 
     for physical theories. But I remain uneasy about relying on them too strongly in our searches for improved fundamental physical 
     theories.
     
     Reductio ad absurdum, which Euclid loved so much, is one of a mathematician's finest weapons (quoting G. H. Hardy).
     
     It would, no doubt, have come as a great surprise to all those who had voiced their suspicion of complex numbers to find that,
     according to the physics of the latter three-quarters of the 20th century, the laws governing the behaviour of the world, at the 
     tiniest scales, is fundamentally governed by the complex-number system.
     
     But this is just the very beginning. We can ask about cube roots, fifth roots, 999th roots, pi-th roots - or event i-th roots.
     We find, miraculously, that whatever complex root we choose and whatever complex number we apply to it (excluding 0), there is always 
     a complex-number solution to this problem.
     
     For comparison, we may recall that em(i) was introduced, in effect, simply to provide a solution to the one particular equation z^2 = -1.
     We get all the rest [solutions to polynomial equations] for free!
     
     The remarkable general answer, for any power series whatsoever, is that there is some circle in the complex plane, centred at 0, called 
     the em(circle of convergence), with the property that if the complex number z lies strictly inside the circle then the series converges for 
     that value of z, whereas if z lies strictly outside the circle then the series diverges for that value of z... Thus, complex numbers 
     supply us with deep insights into the behaviour of power series that are simply not available from the consideration of their 
     real-variable structure.
     
     Einstein's general relativity stands out, in my opinion, as that century's greatest single achievement.
     
     In my view, general relativity is probably here to stay as a description of spacetime in the large-scale limit...
     
     Recall that Einstein's general relativity was crucially based on his insight (the principle of equivalence) which had been
     implicit in observational data that had been around since (and before) the time of Galileo, but not fully appreciated.
     
     ...it is undoubtedly the case that the more deeply we probe Nature's secrets, the more profoundly we are driven into Plato's world of 
     mathematical ideals as we seek our understanding. Why is this so? At present, we can only see that as a mystery.
     
     The most important single insight that has emerged from our journey, of more than two and one-half millenia, is that there is a 
     deep unity between certain areas of mathematics and the workings of the physical world...
     
     It is perhaps even more striking that the most violent explosions seen in the universe are caused by the weakest force of all - if it 
     is fair to call it a force - namely gravitation...where black holes fuel the unbelievably powerful energy sources of quasars.
     
     Let us return to the question of mass/energy in the gravitational field itself. Although there is no room for such a thing in the energy-momentum
     tensor T, it is clear that there are situations where a 'disembodied' gravitational energy is actually playing a physical role.
     
     To take the light speed as fundamental is, in spacetime terms, to take the light cones as fundamental. In fact, from the point of view that
     is appropriate for the geometry of manifolds, it is often better to think of the 'light cone' as a structure in the tangent-space...Frequently,
     the term em(null cone) is used for this tangent-space structure...the term 'light cone' being reserved for the actual locus in spacetime
     that is swept out by the light rays passing through a point p.
     
     Galilean spacetime is not a product space E1 x E3, it is a em(fibre bundle) with a base E1 and fibre E3!
   }
}
  
Hawking and Penrose {
    The Nature of Space and Time (1996) {
      [Penrose] was the first to show that one could discover general properties without solving the [field] equations exactly.
      
      General relativity is a beautiful theory that agrees with every observation that has been made.
      
      But I believe [gravity] is distinctively different, because it shapes the arena in which it acts, unlike other fields which act in 
      a fixed spacetime background. It is this that leads to the possibility of time having a beginning. It also leads to regions 
      of the universe that one can't observe, which in turn gives rise to the concept of gravitational entropy as a measure of what 
      we can't know.
      
      The crucial technique for investigating singularities and black holes that was first introduced by Roger, and which I helped develop, 
      was the study of the global causal structure of spacetime.
      
      The reason one gets conjugate points in spacetime is that gravity is an attractive force. It therefore curves spacetime in such a 
      way that neighbouring geodesics are bent toward each other rather than away.
      
      Between 1965 and 1970 Penrose and I used the techniques I have described to prove a number of singularity theorems. These theorems
      had three kinds of conditions. First there was an energy condition such as the weak, strong, or generic energy conditions. 
      Then there was some global condition on the causal structure such as that there shouldn't be any closed timelike curves. And finally,
      there was some condition that gravity was so strong in some region that nothing could escape.
      
      The prediction of singularities means that classical general relativity is not a complete theory. Because the singular points have to be 
      cut out of the spacetime manifold, one cannot define the field equations there and cannot predict what will come out of a singularity.
      
      As the Einstein equations are generally hard to solve, one looks instead for global properties that imply the existence of singularities.
      
      In fact, cosmic censorship is very important, as the whole theory depends on it, and without it we might see dreadful things instead of 
      a black hole.
      
      I would have liked to draw you a four-dimensional picture. However, government cuts have meant that Cambridge University can afford 
      only two-dimensional screens.
      
      The no-hair theorem, proved by the combined work of Israel, Carter, Robinson, and myself, shows that the only stationary black 
      holes in the absence of matter fields are the Kerr solutions. These are characterized by two parameters, the mass M and the angular 
      momentum J. The no-hair theorem was extended by Robinson to the case where there was an electromagnetic field. This added a third
      parameter Q, the electric charge.
      
      What the no-hair theorem shows is that a large amount of information is lost when a body collapses to form a black hole.
      
      The reason is gravity allows different topologies for the spacetime manifold.
      
      Gravity is the only [interaction] which affects causality, with profound implications with regard to black holes and information loss.
      
      One can paraphrase this [the no-boundary proposal] as "The Boundary Condition of the Universe Is That It Has No Boundary."
       
      The no-boundary proposal implies that the universe is spatially closed. A closed universe will collapse again before an observer 
      has time to see all the universe.
      
      I have emphasized what I consider the two most remarkable features that I have learned in my research on space and time: (1) that gravity 
      curls up spacetime so that it has a beginning and an end; (2) that there is a deep connection between gravity and thermodynamics that 
      arises because gravity itself determines the topology of the manifold on which it acts. 
      
    }
}

Hawking, Stephen {
  Nature 249, review of MTW {
    [Most physicists] distrusted general relativity because of its classical and geometrical nature. This dislike of geometry is shown,
    for example, by the particle physicist Steven Weinberg in the introduction to his otherwise excellent book 
    em(Gravitation and Cosmology)... "too great an emphasis on geometry can only obscure the deep connections between gravitation and the rest
    of physics... I believe that the geometrical approach has driven a wedge between general relativity and the theory of elementary particles."
  }
}

Mermin, David {
    It's About Time (2005) {
      Relativity is perfect for the high school curriculum not only because it offers an astonishing application of elementary high school
      mathematics, but also because everybody is intimately acquainted with the subject of relativity. Relativity is about time. 
      
      That no inherent meaning can be assigned to the simultaneity of distant events is the single most important lesson to be learned 
      from relativity....
      
      ....I realized that the axes [in Minkowski space-time] are an unnecessary and potentially confusing distraction and that all of the sometimes cumbersome 
      trigonometry of my earlier exposition can be replaced by some very simple plane geometry.... Space-time diagrams, as I present them 
      here, are to conventionally presented space-time diagrams as the plane geometry of Euclid is to the analytic geometry of Descartes.
      Analytic geometry is the more powerful tool for professional calculations; Euclid's approach is essential for a deeper understanding.
      
      An important lesson of relativity is that there is less that is intrinsic in things than we once believed.... But that which we have 
      learned is inherent - the interval between two events, for example - turns out to be strange and unfamiliar, while what we once 
      thought was inherent - the time between two events, for example - has turned out to be merely conventional.
      
      Invariants - quantities that everybody agrees on regardless of their frame of reference - play a more important role in our 
      understanding of the world than quantities that vary from one frame of reference to another. The theory of relativity identifies 
      such invariant quantities, and in this sense "theory of relativity" is a terrible name. "Theory of invariance" would have been 
      better, since the most important content of the theory is its identification of quantities that do not change from frame to frame.
      
      The important lesson of the pole-in-barn paradox is that even so innocent sounding a sentence as "The pole is shut up in the barn" 
      can involve an implicit judgment about the simultaneity of events in different places...
    }
}

Zee, Anthony {
    Einstein Gravity in a Nutshell (2013){
      ...infinity is not suitable for the human mind. In theoretical physics, we must have cutoffs.
      
      For me (and of course also for many other theoretical physicists), the most puzzling aspect of Einstein gravity is its ability 
      to alter the causal structure of spacetime completely.
      
      ...in some alternative history of physics, the existence of a spin-1/2 particle could have been another famous prediction of 
      special relativity, like E=mc^2.
      
      I am particularly respectful of, perhaps even awed by, the action principle. It is truly amazing that, while many phenomenological theories
      cannot be derived from an action, all the fundamental interactions we know - gravity, strong, weak, and electromagnetic - can be.
      
      The two older physicists [Lorentz and Poincar] were not able to abandon the perfectly sensible notion that if there is a wave, 
      something must be waving....So they had the ether as a dynamic variable. Einstein simply trashed the ether and asserted that 
      nothing could also wave.
      
      The horizon is an inherently nonlocal concept.
      
      In spacetime, space and time are unified, but time... appears to be first among equals.
      
      Symmetry and the action principle constitute the two great themes of theoretical physics.
      
      In teaching physics, I sometimes feel, with only slight exaggeration, that students are confused by bad notation almost as much as 
      by the concepts.
      
      Take a look at the 19th century literature, before the use of indices became widespread. I am always amazed by the fact that, for example, 
      Maxwell could see through the morass of the electromagnetic equations written out component by component.
      
      A tensor is something that transforms like a tensor.
      
      The central message here is that coordinates do not have intrinsic geometric significance.
      
      I like to think of [displacement and gradient] as the two "primeval" vectors.
      
      This is Noether's Theorem, proved in that momentous year for physics 1915: for every transformation that leaves the Lagrangian unchanged, 
      there is a conserved quantity.
      
      Mysteriously, all of fundamental physics is governed by the action, from which the equations of motion follow.
      
      The twin "paradox" is resolved by pointing out that it is not a paradox at all. In ordinary space, nobody claims that the lengths of 
      different paths connecting two points are necessarily the same... The lengths of different paths connecting two points in spacetime 
      can of course be different.
      
      Although simultaneity fails, causality still holds.
      
      Then the action does not change under the transformation in (2), known as a gauge transformation. We have discovered a hidden
      symmetry of the action, called gauge invariance. Strictly speaking, a gauge symmetry of the type discussed here is not a symmetry, 
      but rather a redundancy in the description.... [the potential field] A(x) contains degrees of freedom that are not physical....
      
      Knowing this, can we deduce Maxwell's theory and hence, the facts of electromagnetism, without ever stepping inside a laboratory?
      To a large extent, we can! The requirement of Lorentz invariance is a powerful constraint on Nature.
      
      Einstein taught us to deduce physics from symmetry, instead of symmetry from physics.... Instead of laboriously distilling 
      this theory from a motley collection of experimental facts and then extracting a symmetry, he formulated a symmetry empowering 
      him to to write down his theory of gravity in one fell swoop.
      
      I regard Einstein's understanding of how symmetry dictates design as one of the truly profound insights in the history of physics.
      Fundamental physics is now conducted largely according to Einstein's schema rather than that of 19th century physics.
      
      The equivalence principle is a statement about physics in a small region of spacetime.
      
      More accurately, gravity is equivalent to the curvature of spacetime, or gravity and the curvature of spacetime are really the same thing.
      
      The equivalence principle is not a statement about symmetry.
      
      The scalar curvature is the unique scalar we can form out of the metric and two powers of derivatives.
      
      Any process not explicitly forbidden will occur, even though the probability of the process actually occurring may be very small.
      Thus, in the quantum world, Einstein is no longer allowed to remove the cosmological constant from his theory.
      
      The puzzle for quantum field theorists is not whether lambda is present in the action, but why observationally it has the value it does.
      
      ...in Einstein gravity, the term "matter" is often used in an extended sense to include everything else besides gravity, such as the 
      electromagnetic field, which we normally do not think of as matter.
      
      I must emphasize, once again, that the gravitational field is [g with covariant indices], not [g with contravariant indices].
      The reason is that from the very beginning we defined coordinates to carry upper indices... Thus, particles couple to 
      [g with covariant indices], not [g with contravariant indices].
      
      The nonlinearity of Einstein's field equations renders exact solutions rather unlikely, except in situations endowed with a high 
      degree of symmetry.
      
      ... the gravitational field is trying to extremize the scalar curvature.
      
      As this discussion makes clear, it is really advantageous to have radial light rays always move along 45-degree lines.
      To this, Roger Penrose added another attractive feature of having the range for the coordinates be finite. The resulting diagram 
      is known as a [Carter-Penrose] diagram and is extraordinarily useful for seeing the causal structure of the spacetime.
      
      It is as if the entropy of a black hole were to reside completely on its surface. Indeed, imagine laying down a grid on the surface 
      of a black hole. Somehow, each Planck-sized cell contains one unit of entropy. This mysterious property of black holes, which 
      represents one of the deepest puzzles in theoretical physics, led 't Hooft and Susskind separately to formulate the so-called 
      holographic principle.
      
      It is worth emphasizing that frame dragging is not a mysterious effect associated somehow only with black holes, as some people confusedly 
      think. It is a general relativistic effect, which does not occur in Newtonian gravity, generated by any massive body.
      In particular, the Earth drags the spacetime frame around it.
    }
}
  
Wald, Robert {
    General Relativity (1984) {
      After learning the theory, one cannot help feeling that one has gained some deep insights into how nature works.
      
      The notion that there is absolute simulaneity is a deeply ingrained one. The fact that there is no such notion is one of the most 
      difficult ideas to adjust to in the theory of special relativity.
      
      An inertial observer can label the events of spacetime in the following manner. He can build himself a rigid frame and label 
      the grid points of the frame with the Cartesian coordinates x, y, z of the (assumed Euclidean) geometry of the frame. He can then 
      have a clock placed at each grid point and synchronize each clock with his by a symmetrical procedure, e.g., by making sure 
      that a given clock and his give the same reading when they receive a signal sent out in a symmetrical manner by an observer 
      stationed halfway between the two.... The observer may carry the grid, complete with synchronized clocks, in a nonrotating manner.
      Each event in spacetime can now be labeled with the coordinates x, y, z of the grid point at which the event occurred and the reading 
      t of the (synchronized) clock at that event.
      
      Thus, the theory of special relativity asserts that em(spacetime is the manifold R^4 with a flat metric of Lorentz signature defined on it.)
      
      In the context of special relativity, the principle of general covariance states that the spacetime metric is the only quantity 
      pertaining to spacetime structure which can appear in any physical law. This principle is believed to apply to the laws of 
      physics in special relativity with one important modification. Experiments demonstrating parity violation and (indirectly) demonstrating 
      the failure of time reversal symmetry have shown that two further aspects of spacetime structure can appear in physical laws: the 
      time orientation and space orientation of spacetime.
      
      Different timelike curves connecting the same pair of events may have different elapsed times (the "twin paradox"), just as different 
      paths between two points of space can have different lengths. As discussed in section 3.3, the maximum elapsed time between two 
      events is given by geodesic (i.e., inertial) motion.
      
      As a result, we have no meaningful way of describing a gravitational force field; rather, we are forced to view gravity as an aspect 
      of spacetime structure. Although absolute gravitational force has no meaning, the relative gravitational force (i.e. tidal force) between 
      two nearby points still has meaning and can be measured by observing the relative acceleration of two freely falling bodies.
      This relative acceleration is directly related to the curvature of spacetime by the geodesic deviation equation.
      
      The framework of general relativity permits the Lorentz metric em(g) of spacetime to be curved. Indeed, it asserts that spacetime must be 
      curved in all situations where, physically, a gravitational field is present. Since we are allowing curved geometries, it is also 
      much more natural to allow spacetime to have a manifold structure M other than R^4. Hence, in general relativity we place no 
      em(a priori) restriction on the spacetime manifold. 
      
      Perhaps, then, the paths of freely falling bodies are always geodesics, but the spacetime metric is not always that given by special 
      relativity. What we think of as a gravitational field would then not be a new field at all, but rather would correspond to a deviation 
      of the spacetime geometry from the flat geometry of special relativity.
      
      The laws of physics in general relativity are governed by two basic principles: (1) the principle of general covariance... which states 
      that the metric g and quantities derivable from it are the only spacetime quantities that can appear in the equations of physics; 
      (2) the requirement that equations must reduce to the equations satisfied in special relativity in the case where g is flat. 
      As mentioned previously, the first principle is imprecise because the term "spacetime quantity" is not well defined. As will be 
      illustrated below, these two principles alone do not uniquely determine the laws of physics in general relativity. However, together
      with simplicity and aesthetics, they serve as general guides which, in many cases, lead directly to natural candidates for physical laws.
      
      The entire content of general relativity may be summarized as follows: Spacetime is a manifold M on which there is defined a Lorentz 
      metric em(g). The curvature of em(g) is related to the matter distribution in spacetime by Einstein's equation.
      
      Thus, in general relativity, one must solve simultaneously for the spacetime metric and the matter distribution.
      
      Note, however, that bodies which are "large" enough to feel the tidal forces of the gravitational field will deviate from geodesic motion.
      
      The issue of energy in general relativity is a rather delicate one. In general relativity there is no known meaningful notion of 
      local energy density of the gravitational field.
      
      After Hubble's redshift observations in 1929 demonstrated the expansion of the universe, the original motivation for the introduction 
      of lambda was lost. Nevertheless, lambda has been reintroduced on numerous occasions when discrepancies have arisen between theory 
      and observations, only to be abandoned again when these discrepancies have been resolved.
      
      For many years it was generally believed that the prediction of a singular origin of the universe was due merely to the assumptions 
      of exact homogeneity and isotropy, that if these assumptions were relaxed one would get a non-singular "bounce" at a small em(a) rather 
      than a singularity. However, the singularity theorems of general relativity show that singularities are generic features of cosmological 
      solutions; they have ruled out the possibility of "bounce" models close to the homogeneous, isotropic models. Of course, at the 
      extreme conditions very near the big bang singularity one expects that quantum effects will become important, and the predictions of 
      classical general relativity are expected to break down.
      
      In general relativity, the causal structure of spacetime is em(locally) of the same qualitative nature as in the flat spacetime of 
      special relativity. However, significant differences can occur globally because of nontrivial topology, spacetime singularities, or 
      the "twisting" of the direction of light cones as one moves from point to point.
      
      These [singularity] theorems prove that singularities em(are) true, generic features of cosmological and collapse solutions.
      Although they give very little information concerning the detailed structure of these singularities, they show that models such as 
      the nonsingular "bouncing universe" are incompatible with general relativity provided only that certain energy conditions are 
      satisfied by matter and several other conditions hold in the spacetime.
      
      Although the singularity theorems do not prove that the singularities of classical general relativity must involve unboundedly large 
      curvature, they strongly suggest the occurrence in cosmology and gravitational collapse of conditions in which quantum or other 
      effects which invalidate classical general relativity will play a dominant role.
      
      Intuitively, a spacetime singularity is a "place" where the curvature "blows up" or other "pathological behavior" of the metric takes place.
      The difficulty in making this notion into a satisfactory, precise definition of a singularity stems from the above terms placed in quotes.
      
      Thus, the "big bang" singularity of the Robertson-Walker solution is not considered to be part of the spacetime manifold; it is 
      not a "place" or a "time." Similarly, only the region r>0 is incorporated into the Schwarzschild spacetime... the singularity at 
      r=0 is not a "place."  
      
      Remarkably, it has been possible to show that the two-parameter family of solutions - characterized by total mass M, and total angular 
      momentum J - found by Kerr (1963) are the only vacuum solutions of Einstein's equations describing stationary black holes.
      
      A surprising development in the theory of black holes was the discovery that energy can be extracted from a "rotating" black hole, 
      i.e., a Kerr black hole with non-zero J. Although nothing can escape from a black hole, it is possible to make a black hole 
      "swallow" a particle or wave with negative energy.
      
      Finally, one of the most intriguing aspects of the theory of black holes is the analogy between the laws of black hole physics and 
      the ordinary laws of thermodynamics. At first sight, it would appear that the nature of these laws hardly could be more different.
      The laws of black hole physics are rigourous theorems in differential geometry, while the laws of thermodynamics are only macroscopic 
      approximations to complicated, exact microscopic laws of physics. Nevertheless, a remarkably close mathematical analogy exists 
      between these laws, highlighted by the analogy between the law of area increase for black holes and the law of entropy increase for 
      thermodynamic systems.
      
      Cosmic Censorship Conjecture (version 1; physical formulation). The complete gravitational collapse of a body always results in 
      a black hole rather than a naked singularity; i.e., all singularities of gravitational collapse are "hidden" within black holes, where 
      they cannot be "seen" by distant observers.
      
      The issue of whether the cosmic censorship hypothesis is correct remains the key unresolved issue in the theory of gravitational collapse.
      The physical relevance of black holes depends in large measure on the validity of this conjecture.
      
      Cosmic Censorship Conjecture (version 2; physical formulation). All physically reasonable spacetimes are globally hyperbolic, 
      i.e., apart from a possible initial singularity (such as the "big bang" singularity) no singularity is ever "visible" to any 
      observer.
      
      Indeed, except for the singularity theorems, very little is known about the general, global properties of solutions of Einstein's 
      equations. 
      
      It should be noted that black holes formed by stellar collapse must lie in the relatively narrow mass range of of 2-100 
      solar masses since stars with lower mass should not collapse, while ordinary stars with higher mass do not exist on account of 
      pulsational instabilities.
      
      In chapter 9, we proved that if a trapped surface is present in a spacetime, appropriate energy conditions are satisfied by matter,
      and a number of further hypotheses hold, then a singularity must occur. Thus, trapped surfaces are associated with singularities.
      ... All trapped surfaces must be entirely contained within black holes.
      
      Hence, in astrophysically reasonable situations it appears that e<<M, so we may neglect the effects of the electromagnetic field on 
      the spacetime geometry and consider only the Kerr family of black holes.
      
      ...we interpret the true singularity at sigma=0 as a ring singularity, i.e., that we define the charged Kerr metrics on a manifold 
      whose structure in a neighbourhood of this singularity has the topology of R4 with the set S1xR - that is, a ring, S1, cross "time", R - removed.  
       
      Thus, closed timelike curves exist in a neighbourhood of the ring singularity... In this case, the ring singularity is "naked", i.e., the 
      charged Kerr metrics fail to be strongly asymptotically predictable, and thus they do em(not) describe black holes.
      Furthermore, one may make use of the causality violation occurring near the ring singularity to go "backwards in time" by an arbitrarily
      large amount as measured by the em(t) coordinate... and thereby produce closed timelike curves passing through any point in the spacetime.
      
      In other words, all observers in the ergosphere are forced to rotate in the direction of rotation of the black hole. This may be 
      viewed as an extreme case of how some aspects of Mach's principle are incorporated into general relativity.
      
      Remarkably, as a result of theorems of Israel, Carter, Hawking, and Robinson obtained between 1967 and 1975, a virtually complete 
      proof of has been given that the Kerr black holes are the only possible stationary vacuum black holes. Thus, if the first cosmic 
      censorship hypothesis is correct and if the spacetime resulting from gravitational collapse always "settles down" to a stationary, 
      vacuum final state, the end product of collapse must always be a Kerr black hole. The complete gravitational collapse of two bodies 
      differing greatly from each other in composition, shape, and structure will produce indistinguishable final states provided only that
      their end products have the same total mass and total angular momentum.
      
      The area theorem states that in any physically allowed process, the total area of all black holes in the universe cannot decrease.
      
      Similarly, in a quantum theory of gravitation based on general relativity, one would expect that the fundamental scale at which the classical 
      description becomes wholly inadequate should be set by h-bar, c, and the gravitational constant G. There is a unique combination of 
      these constants which has the dimensions of length... called the em(Planck length). As might be expected, the Planck length arises 
      naturally in attempts to formulate a quantum theory of gravity. Thus, dimensional arguments suggest that a classical description of 
      spacetime structure should break down at scales of the order of the Planck length and smaller.
      
      In cgs units the Planck length is only 10^-33 cm. The smallness of [the Planck length] compared with typical length scales occurring 
      in atomic, nuclear, and elementary particle physics is directly related to the weakness of the gravitational force between two 
      elementary particles as compared with other fundamental forces...
      
      Thus, it is quite possible that a quantum theory of gravitation may even play an important role in the unification of the strong and 
      electroweak interactions. A unified theory of all forces undoubtedly would yield many new predictions of phenomena at presently 
      observable scales.
      
      The essential difference between general relativity and other classical theories appears to be the dual role played by the field g
      as both the quantity which describes the dynamical aspects of gravity and the quantity which describes the background 
      spacetime structure.
      
      Nevertheless, the existence of the laws of black hole thermodynamics indicates the likelihood of a deep connection between 
      gravitation, quantum theory, and statistical physics. It remains for future investigations to explore this connection further.   
  }
    
  # https://archive.org/details/arxiv-gr-qc0511073/page/n11/mode/2up?view=theater    
  Teaching General Relativity (2008) {
    If one takes the time to teach the mathematical material properly, one runs the risk of turning the course into a 
    course on differential geometry and doing very little physics. On the other hand, if one does not teach it properly, 
    then one is greatly handicapped in one's ability to explain the major conceptual differences between general relativity 
    and the pre-relativitistic and special relativistic notions of spacetime structure.
    
    Prior to 1905, it was taken for granted that the causal structure of spacetime defines a notion of em(simultaneity)...It is 
    important to emphasize to students the key role of this assumption in pre-relativistic notions of spacetime structure.
     
    The major revolution introduced by special relativity is largely premised on the fact that the assertions of the previous 
    paragraph concerning the causal structure of spacetime are wrong. Most strikingly, the set of events that fail to be causally 
    connected to an event A comprise much more than a 3-dimensional region.
    
    The geometry required for an understanding of general relativity is simply the generalization of Riemannian geometry to 
    metrics that are not positive-definite. Fortunately, there are few significant mathematical changes that result from this 
    generalization. Consequently, much of the intuition that most people have for understanding the Riemannian geometry 
    of two-dimensional surfaces encountered in everyday life - such as the surface of a potato - can usually be extended to 
    general relativity in a reliable manner.
    
    This situation changes dramatically in general relativity, since the vector space character of space and/or spacetime 
    depends crucially on having a flat geometry. In general relativity, it does not make any more sense to "add" two events 
    in spacetime than it would make sense to try to define a notion of addition of points on the surface of a potato.
    
    The appropriate notion is that of a manifold, which is a set that locally "looks like" Rn with respect to differentiability 
    properties, but has no metrical or other structure.
    The points of an n-dimensional manifold can thereby be labeled locally by coordinates [x] but these coordinate 
    labels are arbitrary and could equally well be replaced by any other coordinate labels [x']
    that are related to [x] in a smooth, nonsingular manner. A precise definition of an n-dimensional manifold can be 
    given as a set that can be covered by local coordinate systems that satisfy suitable compatibility conditions in the overlap regions.
    
    Many treatments of general relativity effectively bypass the above treatment of tensors by working only with the components of tensors 
    in bases associated with coordinate systems....It has the advantage that one can then quickly move on to other topics 
    without spending much time talking about tensors. However, 
    it has the obvious disadvantage that although students may still be trained to use tensors correctly in calculations, they usually 
    end up having absolutely no understanding of what they are.
    
    It is worth noting that the same relation between symmetries and conservation laws that one has in Lagrangian mechanics 
    (namely, Noether's theorem) then automatically applies to geodesics, so in a spacetime with a sufficiently high degree 
    of symmetry, one can actually solve the geodesic equation (or, more precisely, "reduce it to quadratures" ) using 
    only constants of motion.
    
    The main price paid by presenting the mathematical material in this way is a sacrifice of clarity in explaining the 
    fundamental conceptual basis of general relativity - particularly its difference from all prior theories with regard 
    to the nonexistence of any non-dynamical background structure of spacetime - since this conceptual basis is very 
    difficult to understand if one does not formulate the theory in a coordinate independent way. In addition, students 
    will not have the necessary mathematical tools to advance their study of general relativity to topics involving 
    "global methods" - such as the singularity theorems and the general theory of black holes - where it is essential 
    that the concepts be formulated in a coordinate independent way.                
  }  
}
  
Schwarzschild, Karl {
  Letter to Einstein {
    As you see, the war treated me kindly enough, in spite of the heavy gunfire, to allow me to get away from it all and take this 
    walk in the land of your ideas.
  }
}

Way and Nussbaumer {
  Letter to Physics Today (2011) {
    It is widely held that in 1929 Edwin Hubble discovered the expanding universe and that his discovery was based on his extended 
    observations of redshifts in spiral nebulae. Both statements are incorrect... There is a great irony in these falsehoods still 
    being promoted today. Hubble himself never came out in favor of an expanding universe; on the contrary, he doubted it to the end of 
    his days.  
  }
}
 
Synge, J. L. {
 Talking About Relativity (1970) {
   ... of all forms of communication, [communication of scientific matters] is the most exciting when it succeeds, and the most depressing 
   when it fails. But it does not take place through the formal channels precscribed for it, at least not nearly to the extent that many 
   people suppose.
   
   One of course does not decry the elaborate educational systems existent in all civilised countries. They exist for this very purpose,
   but with overtones (economic, political, national and so on) which tend to mask the simple human fact that what is sought is not 
   really economic prosperity or prestige (national or personal) but understanding, pure and simple - the religion of modern man.
   
   So I called this book 'Talking About Relativity', each word pregnant, at least to me. 'Relativity' - obvious, this execrable word for 
   which we can find no alternative.
   
   Nevertheless it may be asserted that mathematical symbolism is merely a very efficient shorthand for recording what might be said 
   or written out at length in words. 
   
   It is only in mathematics that we find clear-cut concepts, and it is probably this inhuman characteristic that makes the subject 
   repellent to many people.
   
   There are two important forks in the road, but they lie so close together that they are hardly distinguishable. One fork is at the 
   concept of em(simultaneity) or absolute time... and the other at the concept of em(rigidity).
   
   Signals are so important in relativity that the subject might well be called the 'theory of signalling' - it would be less confusing 
   than the accepted title.
   
   ...absolute time, or equivalently, instantaneous signalling.
   
   It is a relief to know that we can fall back on atomic clocks.... We may say that an atomic clock ticks with a definite 
   frequency - it keeps time - and this agrees with remarkable accuracy with the usual astronomical time. Indeed it is becoming the 
   vogue to em(define) the unit of time in terms of an atomic clock, and to regard astronomical time as secondary.
   
   Let us then frankly admit that thinking about relativity puts one in a state of mental tension. It is so easy for some 
   Newtonian idea to leak out from the subconscious and vitiate an otherwise (relativistically) impeccable discussion. Only under 
   two conditions do I find myself secure against that leak: when I make a space-time diagram... and secondly when immersed in a 
   mathematical argument in which the various symbols are natural to relativity. In the domain of mere words, I feel insecure and 
   liable to slip into Newtonian ways of thinking unless I exercise great care.   
   
   But a curious thing happened. In my first draft of these chapter headings, I put em(a surface) in the earlier heading, but 
   em(space-time) without the indefinite article in this one, and I began to wonder why I did that. It is worth talking about. 
   Why do I now insert em(a) in this heading?
   
   What we seem to be saying is this: a very small part of a surface may be regarded as a plane... It is clear that [this] calls 
   for some caution. It is sometimes stated thus: a surface is elementarily flat. But this is nonsense, because, no matter how we 
   choose the coordinates, the curvature of the surface remains - it is invariant.
   
   What is gravitation? It is the curvature tensor.... If the curvature tensor vanishes, space-time is flat. It is the curvature tensor 
   that constitutes the gravitational field.
   
   I now have to stop harping on the fact that there are no privileged coordinates in space-time, because in special relativity there 
   is indeed a privileged class of coordinates, namely those for which the line-element takes the simple Minkowskian form....
   
   So [in special relativity] we have a cloud of clocks moving rigidly and they are synchronised in the above manner.
   
   You might think that it would be possible to effect this transformation by playing with a lattice of rods pinned together, but this 
   would not do, because although each square is deformed into a parallelogram, the (Euclidean) lengths of the sides are increased.

   # page 55: he uses 4 clocks for the 4 space-time coords; he leans on proper-time first, not coordinate-time      
   # page 125: curvature from a small triangle: (sum of the three angles - 2pi) / (area of the triangle)  
   # page 170, 171: good diagrams
   
  }
  Relativity: The Special Theory (1955) {
    To understand a subject, one must tear it apart and reconstruct it in a form intellectually satisfying to oneself, and that (in 
    view of the differences between individual minds) is likely to be different from the original form.
    
    Axioms, as we now realise, are not the self-evident truths they were long supposed to be, but rather the rules of a game, the 
    pieces of which are elements or concepts which remain and must ever remain undefined because there is nothing in terms of 
    which to define them.
    
    Let us now get to work. We start with a tabula rasa, a clean sheet, a mind in a state of intellectual nudity.
    
    For my own part (and this is a matter involving one's personal mode of thought) relativity without space-time diagrams -relativity 
    embedded in formulae which are to be interpreted for physics solely in terms of modified Newtonian imagery - such relativity is 
    as dull and confusing as an attempt to contemplate the five regular solids without using three-dimensional spatial intuition.
    Intuition about four-dimensional space-time is difficult and sometimes deceptive on account of false Euclidean analogies.
    
    These transformations are basic in the special theory of relativity, which might almost be called "the theory of the Lorentz transformations."
    
    The first approach (axes fixed and events in space-time changed under the transformation) has been used extensively by E. Cartan and 
    his school. The second approach (events fixed and coordinates changed) is that of the Princeton school of tensor calculus (Eisenhart 
    and Veblen). 
    
    The results we are going to establish seem very queer to most people at first sight. That is because it is so hard for us, reared on the
    absolute time of Newton, to break away from that concept and recognise (as we must in relativity) that 
    there is no absolute simultaneity.
    
    ...on the whole [a space-time diagram's] chief function is as a source of suggestion and a rough guide to precise formal calculations.
  }
  Relativity: The General Theory (1960){
    But it seems to me that the spirit of this book is best described by the word em(irony), used the sense of ... Socrates, and that sense 
    is not easy to explain.... The lust for calculation must be tempered by periods of inaction, in which the mechanism is completely 
    unscrewed and then put together again.... It would perhaps seem that irony of this sort belongs to evaluation rather than to 
    creation, but in the whole history of science there is no greater example of irony than when Einstein said he did not know what 
    absolute time was, a thing which everyone knew.

    I have never been able to understand this principle... Does it mean that the effects of a gravitational field are indistinguishable 
    from the effects of an observer's acceleration? If so, it is false. In Einstein's theory, either there is a gravitational field or 
    there is none, according as the Riemann tensor does or does not vanish. This is an absolute property; it has nothing to do with 
    an observer's worldline... The Principle of Equivalence performed the essential office of midwife at the birth of general 
    relativity... I suggest that the midwife be now buried with appropriate honours and the facts of absolute spacetime be faced. 
    
    To the ironical mind there is little distinction between the mundane and the exalted, and that is no doubt why Socrates had to drink 
    the hemlock cup.
    
    It is to support Minkowski's way of looking at relativity that I find myself pursuing the hard path of the missionary. When, in a 
    relativistic discussion, I try to make things clearer by a space-time diagram, the other participants look at it with polite 
    detachment and, after a pause of embarrassment as if some childish indecency has been exhibited, resume the debate on their own terms.
    Perphaps they speak of the Principle of Equivalence. If so, it is my turn to have a blank mind, for I have never been able to 
    understand this Principle....Does it mean that the effects of a gravitational field are indistinguishable from the effects of an 
    observer's acceleration? If so, it is false. In Einstein's theory, either there is a gravitational field or there is none, according 
    as the Riemann tensor does or does not vanish. This is an absolute property; it has nothing to do with any observer's world-line....The 
    Principle of Equivalence performed the essential office of midwife at the birth of general relativity, but, as Einstein remarked, the 
    infant would never have got beyond its long-clothes had it not been for Minkowski's concept. I suggest that the midwife be now buried
    with appropriate honours and the facts of absolute space-time faced.
    
    In some respects it is unimportant that the metric form of space-time is indefinite. The fact does not obtrude itself in calculating
    the Riemann tensor, for example. But in other respects it is fundamental, and it is most unwise to mislead students of relativity by 
    writing down, as a definition of the metric of flat space-time, an equation [using ds-squared]. This is an undigested heritage from 
    positive-definite days. [These expressions imply that] ds is real for some displacements and imaginary for others. No serious worker 
    in relativity will be confused by this, for he recognizes [such expressions for ds-squared] as a sort of physicist's slang. But why
    perpetuate such nonsense? What we are concerned with is a quadratic form [phi, not ds-squared]... and [we take the absolute value
    of phi before taking the square root], always real. 
  }
}
 
Ohanian and Ruffini {
   Gravitation and Spacetime (1994){
     Einstein discovered his theory of gravitation in 1916. By rights, this theory should not have been discovered until twenty years later, 
     when physicists acquired a clear understanding of relativistic field theory and of gauge invariance. Einstein's profound and 
     premature insights into the nature of gravitation had more to do with intuition than with logic. In contrast to the admirably precise 
     and clear operational foundations on which he based his theory of special relativity, the foundations on which he based general 
     relativity were vague and obscure. As has been emphasized by Synge and Fock, even the very name of the theory indicates a 
     misconception: there is no such thing as a relativity more general than special relativity. But, whatever murky roads he may have 
     taken, in the end Einstein's intuition led him to create a theory of dazzling beauty.
     
     It is the objective of this book to develop gravitational theory in the most logical and straightforward way - in the way it probably
     would have developed without Einstein's intervention. This means that we will begin with the linear approximation and regard 
     gravitation as a field theory, entirely analogous to electrodynamics.... One advantage of this approach is that it gives a clearer 
     insight as to why gravitation is geometry.
     
     This shows that the shape of the tidal ellipsoid is independent of its size.... We therefore regard the prolateness of the tidal 
     ellipsoid as a em(local) measure of the gravitational force.
     
     Although some tidal effects do vanish near the origin of a freely falling reference frame, some other effects remain finite, and it 
     is these that ultimately count.
     
     A more familiar graphical representation of gravitational fields uses the lines of force of the ordinary gravitational force, rather 
     than the tidal force. This is, of course, very useful to an outside observer who wishes to study the motion of a spacecraft, or whatever, 
     through the field. But this representation fails to describe what happens locally. If we want a description of what the astronauts 
     experience inside their spacecraft, then the picture of tidal forces is much more relevant than that of ordinary force.
     
     We can therefore use the angular acceleration to detect the tidal force. If the [non-spherical] body is originally spinning, then the 
     tidal force will cause a precession of the spin. A well-know example is the equinoctial precession of the spin of the Earth, which 
     is caused by the lunar and solar tidal forces acting on the equatorial bulge of the Earth.
     
     From this survey of actual experiments and em(Gedanken)-experiments, we see that there exist several methods for measuring the tidal 
     field em(locally), in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of a given point.... The tidal field is no less a local quantity than, say, 
     the electric field. 
     
     em(Local) experiments can distinguish between a reference frame in free fall in a gravitational field and a truly inertial 
     reference frame placed far away from all gravitational fields. em(Local) experiments can distinguish between a reference frame at 
     rest in a gravitational field and an accelerated reference frame far away from all gravitational fields. Gravitational effects are 
     em(not equivalent) to the effects arising from an observer's acceleration.
     
     In order to avoid confusion, we will base our further development of gravitional theory on the very precise and unambiguous 
     equality mi=mg. This equality is necessary and, to a large extent, sufficient for the construction of the relativistic theory.
     
     Unfortunately, because the velocity of light is so large, everyday experience leads us to acquire a certain number of misconceptions
     about the structure of spacetime. This set of misconceptions serves as the foundation of Newtonian, or Galilean, spacetime.
     The true structure of spacetime was discovered by Einstein in a study of electrodynamics (1905).
     
     In Newtonian physics, as well as in special-relativistic physics, this parameterization of all points of spacetime by four coordinates 
     can be carried out globally; if we use rectangular coordinates x, y, z, t, each of which ranges from minus infinity to plus 
     infinity, then these coordinates span the entire spacetime. In general-relativistic physics, where spacetime is curved, such a 
     global parameterization is not possible; attempts at extending the coordinates in all directions usually result in singularities in the 
     coordinates. Such coordinate singularities are similar to what a mapmaker finds when he attempts to use the longitude and latitude 
     angles as coordinates for the curved two-dimensional surface of the Earth; these coordinates develop singularities at the poles of the 
     Earth, where the longitude fails to be unique. Nevertheless, even for the curved spacetime of general relativity, it is still possbile 
     to construct well-behaved four-dimensional coordinate patches locally, for a finite neigborhood of a given point.... Mathematically, 
     a space that can be covered by coordinate patches with real numbers as coordinates is called a em(manifold). Thus, spacetime is 
     a four-dimensional manifold.
     
     Unfortunately, some books follow the abominable custom of introducing a factor of em(i) into the time component of four-vectors.
     This simplifies the notation somewhat, because it eliminates the the metric tensor from all equations; but since the metric is 
     precisely the most important feature of special relativity it makes little sense to pretend that it does not exist.
     
     Why do we prefer fields to action-at-a-distance? The answer is simple: we need fields in order to uphold the laws of conservation of 
     energy and momentum.
     
     Newtonian spacetime has em(two distances) [distances and durations], relativistic spacetime em(only one) [interval].[How is distance 
     an invariant, even in Newton's world?]
     
     Although it is true that the most spectacular results of gravitational theory depend in a crucial way on the nonlinearity of the field
     equations, almost all of the results that have been the subject of experimental investigation can be described by the linear approximation.
     
     The reason why we believe in curved space can best be understood by beginning with flat spacetime and seeking the field equations that
     describe the gravitational field (in linear approximation) in this flat spacetime. As we will see, the behavior of "clocks" and 
     "meter sticks" are then such that measurements of spacetime indicate that the real geometry is curved. Thus, the flat spacetime 
     with which we begin turns out to be an unobservable, fictitious geometry.
     
     Since the behavior of freely falling clocks is completely predictable from the principle of equivalence, we will use freely falling clocks
     for all our measurements in the gravitational field, even measurements at a fixed position, for instance, a measurement at a fixed 
     position on the surface of the Earth. For this purpose, we use a freely falling clock, instantaneously at rest at the fixed position. As 
     soon as this clock has fallen too far from our fixed position and acquired too much speed, we must replace it by a new clock, instantaneously
     at rest. Whenever we speak of the time as measured by "a clock located at a fixed position" in a gravitational field, this phrase 
     must be understood as shorthand for a complicated measurement procedure, involving many freely falling, disposable clocks, used in 
     succession.
     
     Atomic clocks are not usually found in free fall. They are usually at rest in the gravitational field (for instance, at rest on the 
     surface of the Earth or a star), and this means that they are accelerated relative to freely falling clocks. We might worry about 
     the disturbances caused by this acceleration. These disturbances can be estimated, and they are negligible.
     
     However, there are three interesting observable effects that we can calculate from the linear approximation: the gravitational time 
     dilation, the deflection of light by the gravitational field of the Sun, and the retardation of light signals.
     
     The experiments on gravitational time dilation may be regarded as direct measurements of the g00 component of the metric tensor.
     
     Evidently, the observations of the light deflection are afflicted with large experimental errors, and in spite of fifty years of 
     efforts, the errors in the most recent observations are about as large as those in the first observations.
     
     More precise results [on the deflection of light] have been obtained by the use of radio waves rather than optical light. 
     In this case, it is not necessary to wait for an eclipse; rather one must wait for the Sun's limb to approach some radio 
     source in the sky.
     
     Another observable effect that we can obtain from the linear approximation is the time delay suffered by a radar signal sent from 
     the Earth to a planet and reflected back to Earth. As first recognized by Shapiro, the gravitational field of the Sun 
     contributes a measurable increment to this time delay, because it reduces the speed of propagation of light signals.... A comment
     on just what is meant by the "slowing down" of the speed of propagation of light may be helpful. Although a light signal that passes
     close to the Sun will be delayed, this does not mean that an observer who measures the speed of the signal at a point near the Sun
     will obtain a different result from the usual speed of light. The speed given by Eq. [47] is not a locally measured speed but an 
     effective speed measured with standards of time and length that are far away, outside of the gravitational field.
     
     There are three different aspects to the structure of spacetime: the differential structure, the topological structure, and the 
     geometric structure. Crudely speaking, the differential structure tells us how smooth spacetime is, and how many dimensions it has.
     The topological structure tells us how the different parts of spacetime are connected, that is, which points are in the 
     neighborhood of which....Finally, the geometric structure tells us how to construct parallel lines, and it tells us the 
     distances between points in spacetime.
     
     However, such "lenses" do not have the optical properties of genuine lenses. The magnitude of the deflection angle of a ray 
     passing through a genuine lens increases in direct proportion to the impact paramater... But the magnitude of the deflection
     angle of a ray passing through the gravitational field of a star em(decreases) with impact parameter.... Hence such a 
     gravitational lens has no well-defined focal length, and it cannot produce genuine images, real or virtual.
     
     From the analysis of the amount of distortion [in a gravitational lens] as a function of radial distance from the 
     center of the cluster, it is possible to calculate the cluster mass. The mass deduced in this way is larger than the sum of the masses 
     of the luminous galaxies in the cluster; thus, there must be dark matter in the cluster.
     
     A gravitational lens can be simulated optically by a disk of glass with its surface shaped in such a way that light 
     rays are deflected by the same angle as in a gravitational field.
     
     The energy, pulse shape, and polarization of bursts of gravitational radiation could reveal to us the astrophysical processes in 
     which these bursts are generated.
     
     The deformations shown in all these figures [of distortions made by gravity waves] are essentially tidal effects...but time 
     dependent rather than static.
     
     Mathematically, a Riemannian space is a differentiable manifold endowed with a topological structure and a geometric structure.
     In the discussion of the geometric structure of a curved space we can make a distinction between the em(affine) geometry 
     and the em(metric) geometry. These two kinds of geometry correspond to two different ways in which we can detect the curvature
     of a space. One way is by examination of the behavior of parallel line segments, or parallel vectors....Another way in which 
     we can detect curvature is by measurement of lengths and areas.
     
     Thus, to carry out the comparison of theory and experiment, the physicist cannot ultimately avoid the language of components; only a 
     pure mathematician can adhere exclusively to the abstract, coordinate-free language of differential forms.
     
     In flat spacetime, rectangular coordinates are preferred because both the metric and the Lorentz transformations take their simplest 
     form when expressed in these coordinates.
     
     Unfortunately, in a curved spacetime the coordinates that lead to the simplest mathematics often lack any obvious 
     physical interpretation...
     
     One way to label spacetime points is to imagine all of space to be filled with small clocks, each of which carries a dog tag with the 
     values of the spatial coordinates printed on it. There is no need that these clocks be "at rest"; a continuous streaming will keep the 
     coordinate values smooth and acceptable. The coordinates of spacetime points in the empty space between adjacent clocks can be 
     obtained by interpolation, using meter-sticks or a radar-ranging procedure (the interpolation can be performed as in a flat 
     spacetime, since locally any curved spacetime is approximately flat). 
     
     A somewhat more elegant proposal for labeling spacetime points
     is the following: Suppose that at some distance from the region where we want to introduce coordinates, there are three "fixed" stars
     (red, white, and blue), which are not collinear. For the spatial coordinates of a given point in space we can then adopt the 
     three angles between the stars as seen from the given point. For the time coordinate we can adopt the angle between, say, the red 
     star and a fourth star (yellow) which is in motion with respect to red, white, and blue. Note that it is not really necessary that 
     the red, white, and blue stars be fixed; even if they are in motion, the coordinates will be well defined.... We might call the 
     numbers obtained in this construction astrogator coordinates....
     
     Note that em(x is not a vector) with respect to general coordinate transformations...
     
     [Tangent vectors and differential forms] give us more concise equations, and also permit us to derive some identities in a more 
     elegant manner.         
     
     The solutions of this equation, called em(Killing vectors), give us the symmetry transformations of the metric, both the infinitesimal 
     transformations and the finite transformations.
     
     ...with a suitable choice of coordinates, any symmetry transformation of the metric can be regarded as a translation of one of the 
     coordinates, and the metric is then independent of this one coordinate. Checking for the independence of the metric from some 
     coordinate is, of course, a familiar method for discovering symmetries "by inspection".
     
     The Killing equation gives us a straightforward, systematic method for finding the symmetries.... Each linearly 
     independent Killing vector corresponds to a separate symmetry of the spacetime.
     
     Apart from flat spacetime, the only maximally symmetric spacetimes are those of constant curvature, such as the isotropic and 
     homogeneous models of the universe....
     
     Since Einstein's theory of "general relativity" is no more relativistic than special relativity, it would be preferable to adopt 
     the name em(geometrodynamics) for this theory. This name, coined by Wheeler, puts the emphasis where it belongs - on the dynamical 
     geometry that acts on and reacts to matter.
     
     Principle of general covariance: All laws of physics shall be stated as equations covariant with respect to general coordinate 
     transformations. We will obey this commandment for the best of all reasons - it costs us nothing to do so. As we have seen, an
     equation that is not covariant can be easily transformed into an equivalent equation that is covariant. From a mathematical point 
     of view, the covariance principle is therefore seen to be a triviality. That the principle of covariance imposes no restrictions
     on the content of the physical laws, but only on the form in which they are written, was recognized by Kretschmann (1917) in a 
     critical examination of Einstein's theory. 
     
     Unfortunately, the [field equations are] very complicated... No general procedure exists for solving the equations analytically; one
     guesses solutions as best one can.
     
     The tensor T appearing on the right side [of the field equations] is the energy-momentum tensor of matter. The energy-momentum of the 
     gravitational field is already included (implicitly) on the left side of the equation - all the nonlinear terms on the left side 
     represent the energy-momentum tensor of the gravitational field.
     
     The Einstein equations do not determine the unknown functions [the g's] entirely.... the ambiguity in the solution for g arises from 
     the ambiguity in the choice of coordinates. That the Einstein field equations determine the g's only up to a general coordinate 
     transformation is actually highly desirable: it would be absurd that the field equations should not only determine the geometry, 
     but also prescribe what coordinates we must use to describe the geometry. 
     
     Hilbert adopted the physical basis that Einstein had gradually laid for the theory of gravitation in work extended over several years, 
     and he actually discovered and published the field equations a few days before Einstein.
     
     The cosmological term can be interpreted as an energy-momentum of the vacuum.
     
     It must be kept in mind that the mass M [in the Schwarzschild metric] is the total mass of the system; the mass-energy contributed 
     by the gravitational fields is included in M.
     
     ...it can be shown that any spherically symmetric vacuum solution of Einstein's equations must be static and must agree with the 
     Schwarzschild solution. This is em(Birkhoff's theorem).... The field that a spherically symmetric mass distribution produces in the 
     surrounding region is always the static Schwarzschild field, regardless of whether the mass is static, collapsing, expanding, or pulsating.
     
     Fock...strongly condemns Einstein for describing the theory of gravitation as "general relativity". Although Fock's criticisms are 
     excessive, they do help to clear the air.
     
     The dimensionless quantity GM/rc^2 may be regarded as a measure of the strength of the gravitational field. This quantity enters into 
     the formulas for light deflection, light retardation, gravitational redshift, perihelion precession, etc. The small magnitude of the 
     relativistic gravitational effects in the Solar System is related to the small magnitude of this quantity; even at the solar 
     surface, GM/rc^2 is only 2x10^-6. Large relativistic effects are found in the gravitational field of an extremely compact mass, 
     where GM/rc^2 can attain values of the order of magnitude of 1. 
     
     In the region r less than the Schwarzschild radius, t is a em(spacelike) coordinate, and r is a em(timelike) coordinate.
     
     The surface r = [the Schwarzschild radius] acts as a "one-way membrane", through which signals can be sent in, but not out.
     This is a global (or nonlocal) property because in order to test it, we must examine the propagation of light signals and other 
     signals and check what happens to them in the long run.
     
     Such a hovering light signal on the horizon of a black hole should not be confused with a signal in a circular orbit around the black
     hole; the hovering signal has no circular motion, and it is completely stationary.
     
     For the case of the Schwarzschild geometry, the coordinates that make things easy are the Kruskal coordinates....
     
     The white-hole portion of the complete Kruskal solution is probably as irrelevant to our universe as are the advanced solutions of 
     Maxwell's equations.
     
     From a practical point of view, the complete Kerr geometry is as irrelevant to physics as the complete Schwarzschild geometry.
     
     Finally, note that in the case of collapse of a spherical, nonrotating star, the Schwarzschild solution fails to hold in the interior, 
     but the Birkhoff theorem guarantees that it will at least hold in the exterior. In the case of collapse of a rotating star, there is 
     no such theorem, and the exterior solution need not be that of Kerr. Only a long time after the collapse, when everything becomes stationary,
     will the exterior solution tend toward those of the Kerr solution.
     
     Essentially, a degenerate Fermi gas of electrons supplies the equilibrium pressure in a white dwarf and a Fermi gas of neutrons that in 
     a neutron star.
     
     At the white-dwarf densities...the electrons are detached from their nuclei and move quite freely throughout the volume of the star.
     The star consists of interpenetrating gases of electrons and nuclei.
     
     The density of a neutron star is comparable with nuclear densities...and hence the star may be described as a single giant nucleus.
     
     The reason for this is that stiffness of a material is directly related to the speed of sound waves in the material - the 
     stiffer the material, the higher the speed of sound. The requirement that the speed of sound be no more than the speed 
     of light then sets a limit on the stiffness of the material [in the core of a collapsing neutron star].... This leads to the 
     conclusion that the mass of a neutron star can never exceed 3.2 solar masses, independent of any assumptions about the details
     of the equation of state at high densities.
     
     However, the "frozen star" very soon becomes practically indistinguishable from a black hole. Calculations of the intensity of 
     the light emitted by the surface of a collapsing star show that the brightness seen by an outside observer decreases 
     sharply while the redshift increases (the brightness decreases exponentially with time, with a characteristic "half-life" 
     of the order GM...) 
     
     It is known that trapped surfaces will form in all cases of gravitational collapse that are reasonably close to spherical collapse, 
     and it is believed that trapped surfaces will form even if collapse is very different from spherical collapse. The Hawking-Penrose 
     theorem then tells us that singularities will form.
     
     It is tempting to conjecture that the Hawking-Penrose theorem of classical geometrodynamics is as irrelevant to the real world as 
     the Earnshaw theorem of classical electrodynamics...according to which atoms are unstable and must collapse to a singularity. 
     It may well be that when quantum effects are taken into account, the collapsed matter attains some nonsingular final state.
     
     Accretion by a Schwarzschild black hole can convert up to 5.7% of the rest-mass energy of the infalling material into radiation; 
     accretion by a Kerr black hole can convert up to 42%. This is to be compared with the maximum energy released in nuclear reactions
     in stars, which is only about 0.7% of the rest-mass energy.
     
     Thus, on a large scale, the most remarkable feature of the universe is its lack of distinguishing features. The assertion that 
     all positions in the universe are essentially  equivalent, except for local irregularities, is know as the 
     em(Cosmological Principle).
     
     Thus, a count of numbers of galaxies as a function of brightness can be used as a direct observational test of homogeneity.
     
     ...the counts indicate that the density of quasars must have been much higher in the past than it is now.
     
     
   }
}

Fock, V. {
   The Theory of Space, Time and Gravitation (1964) {
     [The] general trend [of the author's views] is to lay stress on the Absolute rather than on the Relative.
     
     On the other hand, the principles of relativity and equivalence are of limited application and, notwithstanding their heuristic value, 
     they are not unrestrictedly part of Einstein's Theory of Gravitation as expressed by the gravitational equations.
     
     Galilean space is of maximal uniformity. The uniformity of space and time manifests itself in the existence of a group of transformations 
     which leave invariant the four-dimensional distance or interval between two points. 
     
     The law of Galileo can be stated in generalized form as the law of the equality of inertial and gravitational mass. It should be stressed 
     that this fundamental law is of a general character whereas the principle of equivalence is strictly local.
     
     The field equations and the boundary conditions are inextricably connected and the latter can in no way be considered less important
     than the former.
     
     Thus, covariance of equations in itself is in no way the expression of any kind of physical law.
     
     The name em(Chronogeometry) suggested by A. D. Fokker would be more appropriate [than "Theory of Relativity"].
     
     Enough has been said to make clear that the use of the terms "general relativity", "general theory of relativity", or "general 
     principle of relativity" should not be admitted. This usage is inconvenient because it not only leads to misunderstanding, but 
     also reflects an incorrect understanding of the theory itself.
     
     In addition, it follows that the very notion of a "principle of relativity" becomes well defined only when a definite class of 
     reference frames has been singled out. In the usual theory of relativity this class is that of inertial systems.
     
     Since the greatest possible uniformity is expressed by Lorentz transformations there cannot be a more general principle of 
     relativity than that discussed in ordinary relativity theory. All the more, there cannot be a general principle of relativity, as 
     a physical principle, which would hold with respect to arbitrary frames of reference.
     
     It is clear that a principle of relativity implies a covariance of equations, but the converse is not true: covariance of 
     differential equations is possible also when no principle of relativity is satisfied.
     
     ... a general principle of relativity, as a physical principle, holding in relation to arbitrary frames of reference, is impossible.
     
     [The covariance requirement] is a self-evident, purely logical requirement that in all cases in which the coordinate system is not 
     fixed in advance, equations written down in different coordinate systems should be mathematically equivalent. The class of 
     transformations with respect to which the equations must be covariant must correspond to the class of coordinate systems 
     considered. Thus if one deals with inertial systems related by Lorentz transformations and if Galilean coordinates are used, it is 
     sufficient to require covariance with respect to Lorentz transformations. If, however, arbitrary coordinates are employed, it is 
     necessary to demand general covariance. 
     
     Thus the principle of equivalence is related to the equality of inertial and gravitational mass, but is not identical with it.
     The latter is of a general, non-local character while the equivalence of a field of acceleration and a field of gravitation
     exists only locally, i.e. it refers only to a single point in space...Einstein gave to his principle of equivalence a widened 
     interpretation by taking it to imply the indistinguishability of fields of gravitation and acceleration....However to us 
     such an extended interpretation seems inconsistent. The essence of the principle of equivalence may be seen in the fact that it 
     allows the introduction of an appropriate locally geodesic ("freely falling") frame of reference, by use of which a uniform 
     Galilean space can be defined in the infinitesimal. However this in no way justifies conclusions about the equivalence or 
     indistinguishability of fields of acceleration and gravitation in finite regions of space.
     
     There exists a maximum speed for the propogation of any action. This is numerically equal to the speed of light in free space.
     
     This last fact makes it possible to envisage as a model of an inertial reference frame a rigid scaffolding having at each of its 
     junctions a clock, with all clocks synchronous...For all its unwieldliness such a model can be of use and is often discussed 
     in treatments of the Theory of Relativity. However, we prefer the model of the radar station because it allows a continuous 
     determination both of the position of a moving body and of the corresponding time, by the station clock - a determination 
     em(based on a single point), the position of the station.
     
     The radar model is the more flexible one and retains its intuitive value even in cases when the rigid scaffolding is quite 
     inappropriate, for instance, when discussing astronomical distances. In addition, the radar model is one that permits of generalization.
     
     # he flips the sign of the quadratic form; always taken as positive
     
     One could also introduce the notion of clocks nearly or, in the limit, entirely insensitive to impacts and accelerations (for instance 
     atomic systems with large internal frequencies). One could then propose to measure proper time by the readings of such an ideally 
     insensitive clock, this being just the physical meaning of proper time. But one should note that such a proposal, although not in 
     contradiction with the theory of relativity, does not follow from it and represents a special hypothesis.
     
     It is thus clear that the concepts of dimensions and shape of a moving object are closely related to the concept of simultaneity.
     We know already that the notion of simultaneity is not something absolute but depends on the reference frame. Therefore we must
     expect that the shape and size of an object is also not absolute, but must be stated in relation to a definite frame.
     
     Consequently the volume of the rod decreases proportionally with its longitudinal dimension. The same result is true for a body of 
     any shape.
     
     If a transformation exists such that the new functions, expressed in terms of the new variables, satisfy equations of the same form
     as do the old functions in the old variables, the equations are termed em(covariant).
     
     The difference in sign is extremely important for the whole theory because it reflects the existence of a deep distinction between 
     space and time. It would be possible to impose the same sign on all terms of [ds-squared] by introducing imaginary quantities - imaginary
     space coordinates or imaginary time. This course was adopted by Minkowski and Umov; but we believe that it is not appropriate to 
     introduce a symmetry between space and time into our equations in this manner because it obscures the actually existing distinction 
     between them and does not have any mathematical advantages.
     
     The properties of space-time are objective, they are determined by Nature and do not depend on our choice.
     
     These were just the lines we followed in developing the Theory of Relativity which is essentially a theory of space and time.
     The designation "Relativity" has historic reasons and gives only a one-sided idea of the content of the theory.
     
     ...the very notion of a "principle of relativity" becomes well defined only when a definite class of frames of reference has been 
     singled out. In the usual theory of relativity this class is that of inertial systems.
     
     But light possesses energy and by the law of proportionality of mass and energy all energy is indissolubly connected with mass. Therefore 
     light must possess mass. On the other hand, any mass located in a gravitational field must experience the action of that field and in
     general its motion will therefore not be rectilinear.
     
     In short, masses determine the geometrical properties of space and time, and these properties determine the movement of the masses.
     
     The existence of a finite propagation velocity for gravity removes the contradiction inherent in Newton's theory of gravitation with 
     its admission of instantaneous action at a distance. 
     # Synge is similar to Fock, in using 'radar-bases'.
  }
}

Fokker, A. D. {
  Einstein, Inventor of Chronogeometry (1955) {
   By a sport of history, the name relativity theory has been given to a doctrine which claims that the laws of nature are of 
   an absolute invariant character and that the formulation of these laws should preserve their invariancy in spite of any transformation 
   whatever of the coordinates used in the formalism. A great deal of misunderstanding and irrelevant discussion might have been 
   avoided, if from the beginning it had been clear to all, that in this theory one is concerned with 
   em(absolute relations of time and space).
  }
}


Weinberg, Steven {
  Gravitation and Cosmology (1972){
    It should be stressed that general covariance is empty of physical content.
    Any equation can be em(made) generally covariant by writing it in any one coordinate system, and then working out what it looks like
    in other arbitrary coordinate systems...The significance of the Principle of General Covariance lies in its statement about the effects 
    of gravitation, that a physical equation by virtue of its general covariance will be true in a gravitational field if it is true
    in the absence of gravitation. 
    
    The meaning of general covariance can be brought forward by comparing it with Lorentz invariance. Just as any equation can be made 
    generally covariant, so any equation can be made Lorentz-invariant, by writing it in one coordinate system and then working out what 
    it looks like after a Lorentz transformation. However, if we do this with a nonrelativistic equation like Newton's second law, we 
    find that after making it Lorentz-invariant that a new quantity has entered the equation, which of course is the velocity of the 
    coordinate frame with respect to the original reference frame. The requirement that this velocity em(not) appear in the 
    transformed equation is what we call the Principle of Special Relativity, or "Lorentz invariance" for short, and this requirement 
    places a very powerful restriction on the original equation. Similarly, when we make an equation generally covariant, new 
    ingredients will enter, that is, the metric tensor and the affine connection. The difference is that we do not require that these 
    quantities drop out at the end, and hence we do not obtain any restrictions on the equation we start with; rather, we exploit the 
    presence of the [metric tensor and affine connection] to represent gravitational fields. To put this briefly: The Principle 
    of General Covariance is em(not) an invariance principle, like the Principle of Galilean or Special Relativity, but is instead a 
    statement about the effects of gravitation, and about nothing else. In particular, general covariance does not imply Lorentz 
    invariance....
    
    However, the reader should be warned that not everything is a tensor; in particular, the affine connection, despite its appearance, is 
    em(not) a tensor.
    
    We must first write the equations as they hold in special relativity, then decide how each quantity in the equations is to transform 
    under general coordinate transformations, and then replace eta with g and all derivates with covariant derivatives. The resulting 
    equations will be generally covariant and true in the absence of gravitation, and hence true in arbitrary gravitational fields, provided 
    that the system in question is small enough compared with the scale of the fields.
    
    We next prove that [the curvature tensor] is the em(only) tensor that can be constructed from the metric tensor and its first and 
    second derivatives, and is linear in the second derivatives.
    
    Maxwell's equations are linear because the electromagnetic field does not itself carry charge, whereas gravitational fields do carry 
    energy and momentum and must therefore contribute to their own source. That is, the gravitational field equations will have to be 
    nonlinear partial differential equations, the nonlinearity representing the effect of gravitation on itself. 
  }
  
}

French, A. P. {
  Special Relativity (1966) {
    The last and most treacherous aspect of introducing an observer attached to a given frame of reference is that one may get 
    the impression that this observer has some kind of bird's-eye view of the whole of his reference frame at a given instant.
    em(This is entirely false.) A single observer is not ubiquitous; at a given instant he has awareness only of events occurring at his 
    own location - e.g., a burst of photons striking his retina.... Almost always, these statements [about observers] are simply
    statements about the space-time coordinates of a particular event as established by measurement in frame S. If one really means to 
    talk about looking or seeing, then an extra feature - the transmission of information from one point to another - is involved.
    
    Here is where our intuitions cheifly play us false. There is no such thing as em(the) time. "The time" is not a metaphysical abstraction,
    it is the reading on a clock.
    
    We see then that a result upon which observers in all frames agree - what fraction of a group of unstable particles survives between 
    one point event and another - may be attributed to time dilation or to Lorentz contraction, according to one's point of view.
    
    The above considerations do not, however, prevent us from having purely geometric velocities greater than em(c). For example,
    the spot produced on the moon by a laser beam directed from the earth could easily be made to sweep over the moon's surface at a 
    speed much greater than that of light...But no violation of dynamics is involved, for the path of the spot is nothing more than the 
    locus of the points of impact of separate photons, each of which travels from earth to moon with speed em(c).
    
    It seems almost incredible in retrospect, but for over 50 years after Einstein's 1905 paper there was an unchallenged belief among 
    physicists that the Lorentz contraction of a moving body could be seen or photographed.... In 1959, J. Terrell showed that the Lorentz 
    contraction is not in general perceived as such by the eye. [Terrell's paper is incorrect, according to later papers.]  
    
    # point: "a moving clock runs slowly compared with two stationary clocks."
    
    
    
  }
}

Bondi, H. {
 Rept. Progr. Phys (1959) {
   It is in the nature of transformation laws to change most quantities but to leave some quantities unchanged.
   These [latter] are called the invariants of the transformation and serve to define its character. A physical statement of what 
   these invariants are is called a principle of relativity, and the fundamental equations of a theory usually define the principle of 
   relativity applicable to it.
 }
 
 Endeavour (1961) {
   The special theory of relativity is a necessary consequence of any assertion that the unity of physics is essential, for it would be 
   intolerable for all inertial systems to be equivalent from a dynamical point of view yet distinguishable by optical measurements. 
   It now seems almost incredible that the possibility of such a discrimination was taken for granted in the nineteenth century, but at 
   the same time it was not easy to see what was more important - the universal validity of the Newtonian principle of relativity or 
   the absolute nature of time.
 }
}

Schutz, Bernard {
 A First Course in General Relativity (1985) {
   One can only wish that an earlier generation of physicists had chosen more appropriate names for theses theories!
   
   It is important to realize that an 'observer' is in fact a huge information-gathering system, not simply one man with binoculars.
   
   One can envision this coordinate system, rather fancifully, as a lattice of rigid rods filling space, with a clock at every 
   intersection of the rods.
   
   # page 8-10: good pictures
   
   The student to whom this is new should probably regard the notation delta-s-squared as a single symbol, not as the square of a quantity 
   delta-s. Since delta-s-squared can be either positive or negative, it is not convenient to takes its square root. Some authors do, however,
   call delta-s-squared the 'squared interval', reserving the name 'interval' for its square root.
   
   This is what's known as a 'paradox', but like all 'paradoxes' in SR, this comes from not having reasoned correctly.
   
   Students should realize that all 'paradoxes' are really mathematically ill-posed problems, that SR is a perfectly consistent picture 
   of spacetime which has been experimentally verified countless times....
   
   One of the best methods for developing a modern intuition is to be completely familiar with the geometrical picture of SR: Minkowski 
   space, the effect of Lorentz transformations on axes, and the 'picture' of such things as time dilation and Lorentz contraction.
   
   ...there are of course an infinity of freely falling frames at any point. They differ in their velocities and in the orientation of their
   spatial axes, but they all accelerate relative to Earth at the same rate.
   
   Since em(any) nonuniformity is, in principle, detectable, a frame can only be regarded mathematically as inertial in a vanishingly 
   small region.
   
   Einstein's important advance was to see the similarity between Riemannian spaces and gravitational physics. He identified the 
   trajectories of freely falling particles with the geodesics of a curved geometry: they are locally straight since spacetime admits
   local inertial frames in which those trajectories are straight lines, but globally they do not remain parallel.
   
   Basically, a manifold is any set that can be continuously parameterized. The number of independent parameters is the 
   em(dimension) of the manifold, and the parameters themselves are the em(coordinates) of the manifold.
   
   This is the way to think of a manifold: it is a space with coordinates, that locally looks Euclidean but that globally can warp, bend, 
   and do almost anything (as long as it stays continuous).
   
   A differentiable manifold in which a symmetric tensor field g has been singled out to act as the metric at each point is called a 
   Riemannian manifold...The differential manifold is 'primitive': an amorphous collection of points, arranged locally like the points of 
   Euclidean space, but not having any distance relation or shape specified. Giving the metric g gives it a specific shape, as we shall see.
   
   As remarked above, it is customary to refer to [the field equations] as Einstein's equations, a custom which we follow in this book, 
   but it might be fairer to call them the Einstein-Hilbert equations, because the mathematician D. Hilbert derived them independently of 
   Einstein in the same year. Hilbert was motivated by Einstein's own physical arguments, which were known to him, but his 
   mathematical approach to deriving the equations was far more elegant than Einstein's...
   
   The dragging of orbits has become so strong that this photon em(cannot) move in the directon opposite the rotation. Clearly, any particle,
   which must move slower than a photon, will therefore have to rotate with the hole, even if it has an angular momentum arbitrarily large 
   in the opposite sense to the hole's!
   
   The Kerr metric has less symmetry than the Schwarzschild metric, so it might be expected that particle orbits would have fewer 
   conserved quantities and therefore be harder to calculate. This is, quite remarkably, false: even orbits out of the equator have three
   conserved quantities: energy, angular momentum, and a difficult-to-interpret quantity associated with the theta motion. 
   The same remarkable property carries over to the wave equations that govern electromagnetic fields and gravitational waves in the 
   Kerr metric: these equations separate completely in certain coordinate systems.  
 }
}


Pauli, W. {
  Theory of Relativity (1921) {
    ...the argument has been put forward that it is only an "apparent" contraction, in other words, that it is only when it can be 
    simulated by our space-time measurements....But we do not consider such a point of view as appropriate, and in any case the Lorentz 
    contraction is in principle observable....It therefore follows that the Lorentz contraction is not a property of a single measuring
    rod taken by itself, but is a reciprocal relation between two such rods moving relatively to each other, and this relation is in 
    principle observable.
    
    While this consequence of the Lorentz transformation [time dilation] was already implicitly contained in Lorentz's and Poincar's 
    results, it received its first clear statement only by Einstein.
    
    Should one, then, in view of the above remarks, completely abandon any attempt to explain the Lorentz contraction atomistically?
    We think that the answer to this question should be No. The contraction of a measuring rod is not an elementary but a very 
    complicated process.
    
    It is clear that this "transforming away" is only possible because the gravitational field has the fundamental property that it 
    imparts the same acceleration to all bodies; or, stated differently, because the gravitational mass is always equal to the inertial mass.
    
    We thus see that the ten tensor components [the g's] in Einstein's theory take the place of the scalar Newtonian potential; the 
    [Christoffel symbols], formed from their derivatives, determine the magnitude of the gravitational force.
    
    This fusion of two previously quite disconnected subjects - metric and gravitation - must be considered as the most beautiful 
    achievement of the general theory of relativity....This fusion results conclusively from the principle of equivalence and from the 
    validity of special relativity in the infinitely small.
    
    The motion of a particle is em(force-free).
    
    That the non-Euclidean character of the space-time world should show up so little in the behaviour of measuring rods and clocks, but 
    very strongly in the deviation from rectilinear uniform motion of particles (i.e. for the case of gravity), is due to the 
    magnitude of the velocity of light.
    
    For this reason Kretschmann took the view that the postulate of general covariance does not make any assertions about the physical
    em(content) of the physical laws, but only about the mathematical em(formulation); and Einstein entirely concurred with this view.    
    
  }
}

Mendelson, Bert {
  Topology {
    ...the [triangle] inequality d(x,z)d(x,y)+d(y,z) may be thought of as asserting the transitivity of [the] closeness [relationship]; 
    that is, if x is close to y and y is close to z, then z is close to x.
  }
} 

Resnick, Robert {
 Introduction to Special Relativity (1968) {
   The agreed-upon procedure for synchronization then is that A will turn on his light source when his clock reads t=0 and observer B 
   will set his clock to t=L/c the instant he receives the signal. This accounts for the transmission time and synchronizes the clocks 
   in a consistent way.
   
   Although clocks in a moving frame all appear to go at the same slow rate when observed from a stationary frame with respect to which the clocks
   move, the em(moving clocks appear to differ from one another in their readings by a phase constant which depends on their location), that is, 
   em(they appear to be unsynchronized).
   
   There are many shorthand expressions in relativity which can easily be misunderstood by the uninitiated. Thus the phrase "moving clocks run slow" means 
   that a clock moving at a constant velocity relative to an inertial frame containing synchronized clocks will be found to run 
   slow em(when timed by those clocks). We compare em(one moving clock) with em(two synchronized stationary clocks). Those who assume the phrase means 
   anything else often encounter difficulties. 
   
   Similarly, we often refer to "an observer". The meaning of this term also is quite definite, but it can 
   be misinterpreted. An observer is really an infinite set of recording clocks distributed throughout space, at rest and synchronized with respect to 
   one another.... Measurements thus recorded throughout space-time (we might call them local measurements) are then available to be picked up and 
   analyzed by an experimenter. Thus, the observer can also be thought of as the experimenter who collects the measurements made in this way.
   
   It is interesting and instructive to note that there are speeds in excess of c. Although matter or energy (i.e., signals) cannot have speeds greater 
   than c, certain kinematical processes can have super-light speeds. For example, the succession of points of intersection of the blades of giant scissors, 
   as the scissors are rapidly closed, may be generated at a speed greater than c. Here geometrical points are involved, the motion being an illusion, whereas 
   the material objects involved (atoms in the scissors blades, e.g.) always move at speeds less than c. Other similar examples are the succession of points 
   on a fluorescent screen as an electron beam sweeps across the screen, or the light of a searchlight beam sweeping across the cloud cover in the sky.
   The electrons, or the light photons, which carry the energy, move at speeds not exceeding c.
   
   It is instructive to note that the transverse Doppler effect has a simple time-dilation interpretation. The transverse Doppler effect is another 
   physical example confirming the relativistic time dilation.
   
   Viewed in this way, the speed of electromagnetic waves in vacuum assumes a role wider than the travel rate of a particular physical entity. 
   It becomes instead a limiting speed for the motion of anything in nature.
   
   The theory of relativity could have been called, instead, the theory of absolutism with some justification.
   
   Is the length contraction "real" or "apparent"? We might answer this by posing a similar question. Is the frequency, or wavelength, shift in the Doppler
   effect real or apparent? 
   
   We do not speak about theories of matter to explain the contraction but, instead, we invoke the measurement process itself....Hence length contraction 
   is due to the relativity of simultaneity. Since length measurements involve a comparison of two lengths (moving rod and measuring rod, e.g.) 
   we can see that the Lorentz length contraction is really not a property of a single rod by itself but instead is a relation between two such rods 
   in relative motion.
   
   ...at bottom, time measurements are primary and space measurements secondary.
   
   However, we can choose to regard the mass as an invariant scalar quantity which gives the inertial property of a body....Nevertheless, there are 
   advantages of a pedagogic nature to using the concept of relativistic mass.
   
   # diagrams page 194 
 }
}


Born, Max {
  Einstein's Theory of Relativity (1962){
    There is no such thing as absolute simultaneity.
    
    # he uses F = x^2 - c^2y^2, and calls it the fundamental invariant.
    # he uses the x +/- ct (null coords) as a base
    
    The advance made by Einstein's theory is not in the formulation of laws but rather in a fundamental change of viewpoint towards the laws.
    
    Thus the contraction is only a consequence of our way of regarding things and is not a change of a physical reality....The view expounded in the preceding 
    paragraph does away with the notorious controversy as to whether the contraction is "real" or only "apparent". If we slice a cucumber, the slices will 
    be larger the more obliquely we cut them. It is meaningless to call the sizes of the various oblique slices "apparent" and call, say, the smallest which 
    we get by slicing perpendicularly to the axis the "real" size.
    
    ...the mass of the body increases with the velocity approaching that of light.
  }
  
}

Rindler, W. {
  Special Relativity (1966){
    We note, finally, that any effect whose speed of propagation em(in vacuo) is finite and constant could have been used, as light was,
    in the derivation of the Lorentz equations. Since only one transformation can be valid, it follows that all such effects must be 
    propagated with the speed of light.
    
    It must be stressed that the phenomena is not to be regarded as illusory, due perhaps to some peculiarity in our methods of measurement: 
    relative to a given frame it is real in every possible sense. 
    
    If an em(ideal) clock moves em(non-uniformly) through an inertial frame, we shall assume that acceleration as such has no effect on the rate of the 
    clock, i.e. that its instantaneous rate depends only on its instantaneous speed em(v) in accordance with the [formula for time-dilation].
    This we shall call the clock hypothesis. Alternatively it can be regarded as the definition of an ideal clock.
    
    Care must be taken, however, not to regard Minkowski's world as a straightforward generalization of ordinary Euclidean 3-space to 
    four dimensions, with time as just one more dimension. Owing to the distribution of signs in the metric, the time-coordinate x4 is not
    on the same footing as the three space-coordinates, and the world, regarded as a Riemannian 4-space, has non-isotropic properties 
    quite unlike Euclidean space with its positive-definite metric.
    
    The elegant calculus developed by Minkowski (though anticipated by Poincar) thus enables us, among other things, to recognize 
    by its form alone whether a given or proposed law is Lorentz invariant without having to apply a transformation. This has 
    great heuristic value. Moreover, by automatically combining such entities as space and time, momentum and energy, electric and magnetic 
    field, etc., the formalism illuminates some profound physical inter-connections.
    
    The vector PR is said to be timelike. It has, however, one important property without analogue among spacelike vectors, namely that the
    temporal sequence of P and R is absolute, i.e. the same in all frames.
    
    But theories of gravitation within the framework of special relativity have also been devised, one of the earliest being 
    Nordstrom's (1913) and one of the latest G. D. Birkhoff's (1942).
    
    Thus the inertial mass increases as the velocity increases....The inertial mass is least, namely m0, when the particle is at rest.
    
    In accordance with Einstein's hypothesis, em(every) form of energy has a mass equivalent. Thus associated with even an electromagnetic field 
    there is a certain amount of mass. Anticipating that every mass exerts and suffers gravitational influence, we shall therefore expect 
    even an electromagnetic field to exert a certain gravitational pull, and light to bend under gravity.
    
    Any transfer of energy, being equivalent to a transfer of mass, will necessarily involve momentum. Thus, for example, all forms of radiation 
    must exert pressure...
    
    Thus in relativistic mechanics the acceleration is not, in general, in the same direction as the force. The only cases in which these 
    vectors are in the same direction are when the velocity is momentarily zero, or when the force is either parallel or perpendicular to the 
    velocity.
    
    In this way there arose the concepts of longitudinal mass... and transverse mass...Nevertheless, it is preferable not to 
    think of the mass of the particle in this ambivalent way connected with the 3-acceleration, but rather to regard it as the 
    unique coefficient of u in the expression for the 3-momentum. 
    
    # page 41: hyperbolic motion
    
    # page 76, problem 7: remarks on 4-vector operations
  }
  
  
  Mon Not Roy Ast Soc, 116, 662 (1956) { 
    An event-horizon [or a visual horizon, according to Wald], for a given fundamental observer A, is a (hyper) surface in space-time which divides all events into two
    non-empty classes: those that have been, are, or will be observable by A, and those
    that are forever outside A's possible powers of observation.
    
    The other type of horizon, which I shall call a em(particle-horizon), is exemplified
    by the Einstein-de Sitter model-universe. It may be defined as follows: A particle-horizon, for any given fundamental observer A 
    and cosmic instant t0 is a surface in the instantaneous 3-space t=t0, which divides all fundamental particles
    into two non-empty classes : those that have already been observable by A at time t0 and those that have not. 
  }
}

Jammer, Max {
  Concepts of Space (1969){
    With prophetic vision Riemann wrote: "The basis of metrical determination must be sought outside the manifold in the binding forces
    which act on it."
    
    Moreover, already in 1870 Clifford saw in Riemann's conception of space the possibility for a fusion of geometry with physics...Clifford
    conceived matter and its motion as a manifestation of the varying curvature.
    
    But marching along with truth is error.
  }
}

Moller, C. {
  The Theory of Relativity (1952) {
    However, in a textbook of today I think it is useful to stress again the fundamental physical difference between space and time,
    which was somewhat concealed by the purely formal four-dimensional representation.
    
    # he puts emphasis on 3-vectors; his 4-vectors have ict 
    
    Therefore, according to relativistic conceptions, the notion of the length of a stick has an unambiguous meaning only in relation 
    to a given inertial frame, this length being different for the different systems of inertia. This means, however, that the concept of 
    length has lost its absolute meaning. We can only speak of an absolute length in the approximation where the velocity of light can be 
    regarded as infinitely large.
    
    It expresses, however, not so much a quality of the moving stick itself as rather a reciprocal relation between measuring-sticks in 
    motion relative to each other. In this case it is natural to ask for the cause of the contraction. According to the principle of 
    relativity, the answer must be that such a question is just as delusive as if, after the discovery of the law of inertia, the question
    were put why a body left to itself will continue to move straight forward with uniform velocity. While such a question was well
    justified in Aristotelian physics it must be rejected as meaningless after Galileo's discovery. According to Galilean and Newtonian
    mechanics only the deviations from uniform translatory motions require a cause.
    
    Instead of considering the contraction to be a phenomenon which has to be em(explained) on the basis of an atomistic theory of 
    material bodies, it should rather be regarded as something em(elementary) which cannot be traced back to simpler phenomena.
    
    In principle it is permissible, however, to use coordinate clocks of an arbitrary rate, provided that the time variable t defined by
    these coordinate clocks gives a reasonable chronological ordering of the physical events. In accelerated systems of reference 
    the spatial and temporal coordinates thus lose every physical significance; they simply represent a certain arbitrary, but unambiguous, 
    numbering of the physical events.
  }
}

Rosser, W.G.V {
 Introductory Relativity (1967){
   It must be stressed that the theory of special relativity does not say that one cannot have velocities exceeding the velocity of 
   light em(in vacuo), but simply says that energy and momentum cannot be transmitted with a velocity exceeding the velocity of light 
   em(in vacuo)...Thus the point of intersection of the rulers can move with a velocity exceeding the velocity of light.
   
   For example, in the example of a game of tennis on board a ship going out to sea...it was reasonable within the context of Newtonian
   mechanics to find that the velocity of the tennis ball was different relative to the ship than relative to the beach...According to 
   the theory of special relativity, not only the measures of the velocity of the ball relative to the ship and seashore will be different,
   but the measures of the dimensions of the tennis court parallel to the direction of relative motion and the measures of the time of events 
   will also be different.
   
   [Cosmic ray] protons of [high energy] have a value of gamma of approximately 10 billion. If they were not deflected by galactic magnetic fields,
   such protons would reach the edge of the galaxy in about 5 min, measured in the rest frame of the proton....Relative to [the same protons] 
   the dimension of the galaxy are Lorentz contracted by [the same factor of 10 billion] and, in the direction of relative motion of the proton
   and the galaxy, relative to the proton the galaxy would have roughly the dimensions of the solar system.
   
   The use of the term observers in such contexts led some people to conclude that the theory of special relativity required the intervention
   of observers in measurements in a way different from classical Newtonian mechanics, and for this reason the theory of relativity was assumed
   by many people to be more 'idealistic' and less 'materialistic' than Newtonian mechanics. In both Newtonian mechanics and in the 
   theory of special relativity the measurements can be performed by instruments, and the information transmitted to a base where it can be 
   fed into a calculating machine, and after constructing and setting up the apparatus the 'observer' need only read and interpret the 
   results when necessary.
   
   For purposes of discussion it was found convenient to think of the co-ordinate system sigma and sigma-prime as consisting of a series 
   of 'rigid' rulers parallel to the axes, with a series of synchronized clocks distributed throughout space so that the co-ordinates and 
   time of an event could be measured when and where it happened....One could perform the measurements in practice using the radar techniques
   described in....
   
   Now [beta cos theta] is the component of the velocity of the source in the direction of the observer at the instant when the light was emitted
   by the source... [Doppler has two parts - time dilation plus radial motion].
   
   The light from a moving object undergoes both aberration and the Doppler shift in frequency.
   
   Thus, according to the theory of special relativity, the visual appearance of the moving cube is the same as that of a stationary 
   cube rotated through an angle [arcsin v/c]. [Transverse case, subtending a small angle].
   
   It was shown by Terrell that, in the general case [not transverse], when the moving object is viewed at any angle then, according to the 
   theory of special relativity, provided the angle subtended by the moving object at the point of observation is very small, the visual 
   appearance of a moving object is undistorted in shape but rotated by the angle of aberration, where the angle of aberration can be calculated 
   from eqn (4.35). If the object subtends a finite angle at the point of observation, then the different parts of the object appear rotated by 
   different amounts and this leads to a distortion of the shape.
   
   Some readers may find it simpler to visualize the measurement of the times and co-ordinates of distant events, using the radar methods
   described above, rather than use all the paraphernalia of rulers and clocks distributed through space, with observers distributed 
   throughout space to record events when and where they occur.
   
   In Newtonian mechanics it was possible to make statements such as: 'the length of the rod is 30 cm.' Since, in the theory of special relativity,
   the length of a body is not absolute, such a statement has no meaning unless the length is specified relative to some standard of rest.
   
   From the requirement that the quantities appearing in the laws of mechanics must transform according to the transformations of the 
   theory of special relativity, it was necessary to redefine the mass of a moving particle in the laboratory system.
   
   According to the Lorentz transformations the em(x) and em(m) co-ordinates of [B-prime] are [gamma * beta] and [gamma] respectively.
   [Simply corresponds to how matrices work: the columns are the result of mapping unit vectors.] 
 }
}

Foster/Nightingale {
 Short Course in General Relativity (1979) {
   For example, the Stanford linear accelerator, which accelerates electrons close to the speed of light, is about two miles long 
   and cost 100 million dollars; if Newtonian physics were the correct theory, it need only have been about one inch long.
   
   Einstein's general theory of relativity postulates that gravitational effects may be explained by the curvature of spacetime, and 
   that gravity should not be regarded as a force in the conventional sense.
   
   The way in which the dimple around the stalk [of the apple] gives the impression of attraction corresponds to the fact that massive
   bodies modify the curvature of spacetime in their vicinity, and this modification affects the geodesics in such a way as to give 
   the impression that free particles are acted on by a force, whereas in actual fact they are following the straightest paths in the 
   curved spacetime.
   
   ...we shall adopt a much-used convention, which is to em(confuse a tensor with its components).
   
   We therefore adopt another characterisation of a straight line, namely its em(straightness), as our guide to defining geodesics.
   
   ...any cartesian tensor equation valid in special relativity may be converted to an equation valid in general relativity in any
   coordinate system, simply by replacing partial differentiation with respect to coordinates by covariant differentiation, total 
   derivatives along curves by absolute derivatives, and eta by g.
   
    
 }
}

Williams, W. S. C. {
  Introducing Special Relativity (2002) {
    The spatial separation of events is the same for all [inertial] observers... [false; he confuses event pairs with stick lengths.]
    
    There is one aspect of aberration that can be a source of confusion. Light is often observed by eye, either directly or through 
    a telescope, for example. The line-of-sight, or the direction of pointing of the telescope, is directly opposite to that of 
    propagation of the detected photons. The formulae derived and given in Figure 6.3 contain angles defined by the direction of 
    propagation with respect to the boost, not by the line of sight. [Two forms of the aberration formula.]
    
    The journal em(Nature) was the forum for a controversy about time dilation and the clock paradox in 1956. The matter reappeared, again
    in em(Nature), in 1974-5, sustained by one fierce critic of special relativity. 
    
    However, we have seen that nearly half a century passed before those who doubted Einstein fell silent, at least in the scientific literature.
  }
}

Sard, R. D. {
 Relativistic Mechanics (1970) {
   Deep down in our Newtonian bones we understand by an inertial frame a frame of reference that is at rest or in uniform motion with respect
   to absolute space. Absolute space is the imagined framework in which bodies move.
   
   The name "relativity" is justified historically by the fact that the basic concern of the theory is with how the description of 
   phenomena changes when one shifts from one reference frame to another....the original, somewhat negative, name has meanwhile become 
   established by usage.
   
   If the rod's orientation is neither longitudinal nor transverse to the direction of relative motion, both the length and the 
   inclination are different in the rod's rest frame and the laboratory frame.
   
   The inequality of theta and h [angles of a stick with respect to its direction of relative motion] is as much of an affront to pre-Einsteinian habit 
   as is the length contraction and the slowing down of clocks. A weathervane pointing northeast on a house flying east with speed such 
   that gamma=2.4, points north-northeast in the ground frame!
 
 }
}


Misner/Thorne/Wheeler {
  Gravitation (1972) {
    Physics is simple only when viewed locally: that is Einstein's great lesson.
    
    Space acts on matter, telling it how to move. In turn, matter reacts back on space, telling it how to curve.
    
    In christening events with coordinates, one demands smoothness but forgoes every thought of mensuration.
    
    Free fall is synonymous with weightlessness: absence of any force to drive the object away from its normal track through spacetime.
    
    Time is defined so that motion looks simple.
    
    To avoid distraction by the nonlocal element (the Earth) in the situation, conduct the study in the interior of a spaceship, also in 
    orbit about the Earth. But this region has already been counted as a local inertial frame! What gravitational field is to be seen there? None.
    Relative to the spaceship and therefore relative to each other, the two test particales move in a straight line with uniform
    velocity, to the precision of measurement that is contemplated. [Expressed in a misleading way.]
    
    To look at local physics, however, means to compare one geodesic of one test particle with geodesics of other test particles 
    traveling (1) nearby with (2) nearly the same directions and (3) nearly the same speeds. Then one can "look at the separation 
    between the nearby test particles and from the second time-rate of change of these separations and the 'equations of 
    geodesic deviation' read out the curvature of spacetime."
    
    More generally, a certain piece of the Riemann tensor, called the em(Einstein tensor) and denoted ... G, is always generated directly by the 
    local distribution of matter.
    
    The field equation even contains within itself the equations of motion for the matter whose stress-energy generates the curvature.
    
    Everything that goes on in spacetime has its geometric description, and almost every one of these descriptions lends itself to ready 
    generalization from flat spacetime to curved spacetime.
    
    In Einstein's geometric theory of gravity, this equation of geodesic deviation summarizes the entire effect of geometry on matter.
    It does for gravitation physics what the Lorentz force equation does for electromagnetism. 
    
    One sometime participant in special relativity will have to be put to the sword: "em(x4=ict)".
    
    This, in fact, is the mathematical definition of a 1-form: em(a 1-form is a linear, real valued function of vectors...)
    
    Here and elsewhere in science, as stressed not least by Henri Poincar, that view is out af date which used to say, "Define your terms before you proceed."
    All the laws and theories of physics, including the Lorentz force law, have this deep and subtle character, that they both define the concepts they 
    use .... and make statements about these concepts.
    
    It helps in analyzing gravitation to consider a situation where gravity is mocked up by acceleration. [gravitational redshift, deflection of light]
    
    When spacetime is flat, move however one will, special relativity can handle the job.
    
    A tourist in a powered interplanetary rocket feels "gravity". Can a physicist by local effects convince him that his "gravity" is bogus?
    Never, says Einstein's principle of the local equivalence of gravity and accelerations. [Wrong: see Ohanian-Ruffini.]
    
    Thus the [uniformly accelerated] observer will attain relativistic velocities after maintaining this acceleration for something like 
    one year of his own proper time. He can outrun a photon if he has a head start on it of one light-year or more.
    
    Einstein elevated the idea of the universality of gravitational interactions to the status of a fundamental 
    principle of equivalence, that all effects of a uniform gravitational field are identical to the effects of a uniform acceleration of the 
    coordinate system.
    
    This nonmeshing of local Lorentz frames, like the nonmeshing of local Cartesian coordinates on a curved 2-surface, is a clear manifestation of 
    spacetime curvature.
    
    Gravitation is a manifestation of spacetime curvature, and that curvature shows up in the deviation of one geodesic from a nearby geodesic.
    
    Nothing is more wonderful about the relation between Einstein's theory of gravity and Newton's theory of gravity than this, as discovered by 
    Elie Cartan (1923, 1924): that both theories lend themselves to description in terms of curvature; that in both this curvature is governed by the 
    density of mass-energy; and that this curvature allows itself to be defined and measured without any use of or reference to any concept of metric.
    
    But full power this will be only if it can be exercised in three ways: in pictures, in abstract notation, and in component notation.
    
    Each local geometric object has its own official place of residence (event P); it can interact with other objects residing there (tensor algebra); but it 
    cannot interact with any object at another event Q, until it has been carefully transported from P to Q.
    
    The differentiability of a manifold (i.e., the possibility of defining differentiable functions on it ) permits one to introduce coordinate
    systems locally, if not globally, and also curves, tangent spaces, tangent vectors, 1-forms and tensors, just as is done for spacetime.
    But the mere fact that a manifold is differentiable does not that such concepts such as geodesics, parallel transport, curvature, metric, 
    or length exist in it. These are additional layers of structure possessed by some manifolds, but not by all. Roughly speaking, every 
    manifold has smoothness properties and topology, but without additional structure it is shapeless and sizeless.
    That branch of geometry which adds geodesics, parallel transport, and curvature (shape) to a manifold is called affine geometry; that 
    branch which adds a metric is called Riemannian geometry.    
    
    Notice that the word "maximum" in [the integral for proper time along a history] has been replaced by "extremum"... When [events] A and B 
    are widely separated, they may be connected by several geodesics with differing lapses of proper time. Each timelike geodesic 
    extremizes [proper time] with respect to nearby deformations of itself, but the extremum need not be a maximum. When several distinct 
    geodesics connect two events, the typical one is not a local maximum ("mountain peak") but a saddle point ("mountain pass")...
     
    
    But on occasion the reader will encounter a pedantic-sounding paragraph written in mathematics-sect jargon.
    Such paragraphs deal with concepts and relationships so complex that standard physics usage would lead to extreme confusion.
    They also should prevent the reader from becoming so conditioned to physics usage that he is allergic to the mathematical 
    literature, where great advantages of clarity and economy of thought are achieved by consistent reliance on wholly 
    unambiguous notation.
    
    Included [in the energy-momentum tensor] are energy, momentum, and stress associated with all forms of matter and all nongravitational fields.
    
    Any forward step in human knowledge is truly creative in this sense: that theory, concept, law, and method of 
    measurement - forever inseparable - are born into the world in union.
    
    
  }
}

Golstein, Herbert {
  Classical Mechanics (1980) {
    Like Molire's hero who was delighted to learn he had been talking prose all his life without knowing it, we have really been 
    talking about the restricted Lorentz transformation from the beginning of this section without realizing it.
    
    A restricted Lorentz transformation that describes the relation between two systems with parallel axes moving uniformly relatively to each 
    other, i.e., without any spatial rotation, is called a em(pure) Lorentz transformation or, in jargon, a "boost".
    
    In their massive treatise on gravity, Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler call for the extinction of the complex Minkowski space: "One sometime 
    participant in special relativity will have to be put to the sword: 'x4=ict'". It is claimed that the use of a Cartesian space hides
    the basic indefinite nature of the metric - that the square of the magnitude of vectors can be positive, zero, or negative. Further, 
    the artifice of a complex Cartesian space is feasible only in special relativity; in the theory of general relativity the space is 
    curved and the use of a non-Cartesian metric tensor is inescapable. It is also pointed out that in quantum mechanics where wave functions
    or state vectors are complex, the use of an imaginary coordinate will complicate the operation of complex conjugation....It is difficult 
    to oppose such distinguished authority. Nonetheless, we shall here make a stand against the euthanasia of Minkowski space.
  }
}

Stephani, Hans {
  General Relativity (1982) {
    The name 'metric tensor' refers to the fact that by its use the quantities of length and angle which are fundamental to geometrical measurement
    can be defined and calculated.
    
    ...inside an Earth satellite or a falling box bodies move force-free for the co-moving observer. [Ohanian-Ruffini contradicts.]
    
    It says that the tangent vector...of a geodesic remains parallel to itself. The geodesic is thus not only the shortest curve between two 
    points, but also the straightest. The straight line in Euclidean space also has these two properties.
    
    To summarize, we can thus make the following completely equivalent statements.
    The curvature tensor...vanishes if and only if: (a) the space is flat, that is, Cartesian coordinates...can be introduced throughout the space;
    or (b) the parallel transport of vectors is independent of path; or (c) covariant derivatives commute; or (d) the geodesic deviation 
    (the relative acceleration) of two arbitrary particles moving force-free vanishes.
    
    Many criticism have been raised against this principle [of general covariance], their aim being to assert that neither is it a 
    em(physical) principle, nor does it guarantee the correctness of the equations thus obtained.
    
    In other words, a freely falling observer in a gravitational field cannot detect the gravitational field by physical experiments in his 
    immediate neighbourhood; for him em(all) events occur as in an inertial system. [Ohanian-Ruffini contradicts.]
    
    ...one formulates the physical laws in a Lorentz-invariant manner in an inertial system and substitutes covariant for partial derivatives.
    This prescription ensures simultaneously the covariance of the resulting equations and their validity upon using curvilinear coordinates 
    in Minkowski space.
    
    As we have already indicated more than once, the basic idea of Einstein's theory of gravitation consists in geometrizing the gravitational 
    force, that is, mapping all the properties of the gravitational force and its influence upon physical processes onto the properties 
    of Riemannian space.
    
    It is one of its particular merits that, in the Einstein theory, the equations of motion are a consequence of the field equations....Even 
    after the Einstein field equations had been set up it was thought that one had to demand in addition that the geodesic equation be the 
    equation of motion of a test particle, but eventually it was realized that this can be deduced [as a] consequence of local 
    energy-momentum conservation.
    
    An extended body, for example, will in general not move exactly along a geodesic. This is due not so much to the gravitational field 
    caused by the body itself as to the action of 'tidal forces.'
    
    Since a choice of coordinates always leads to requirements on the metric functions, we must proceed carefully in order not to lose 
    solutions by making the restrictions too strong.
    
    In the discussion of physical properties of the Schwarzschild metric one must always remember that em(r) and em(t) in particular are 
    only coordinates and have no immediate physical significance. We therefore call em(t) the em(coordinate time), to distinguish it, for 
    example, from the proper time tau of an observer at rest in the gravitational field....The radial coordinate em(r) is so defined that 
    the surface area of a sphere r=constant, t=constant has the value [4 pi r-squared]. The infinitesimal displacement in the radial 
    direction is...always greater than the difference in the radial coordinates.
    
    Predictions about the numerical value of the velocity of light have little value in general relativity; the only essential thing is that
    light propagates along null geodesics...
    
    In non-linear theories the situation is more complicated, because the singularity need not occur at the position of the source.
    
    Therefore if the metric is singular at a point, one investigates whether this singularity can be removed by introducing a new 
    coordinate system. Or, appealing more to physical intuition, one asks whether a freely falling observer can reach this point and can
    use a local Minkowski system there. If both are possible, then the observer notices no peculiarities of the physical laws and 
    phenomena locally, and hence there is no singularity present.
    
    But first a warning: the reader has perhaps assumed an exact definition of a singularity that includes all mathematical and 
    physical properties, whereas research in this area has not yet advanced so far that such a definition can be given.
    
    To avoid misunderstanding we emphasize that the Kerr solution is not the gravitational field of an arbitrary axisymmetric rotating star,
    but rather only the exterior field of a very special source.    
  }
}

Schutz, Bernard {
 Gravity From The Ground Up (2003) {
   In the modern view, the em(real) signature of gravity, the part of gravity that can't be removed by going into free fall,
   is the em(tidal force), whose most spectacular effect on Earth is to raise the ocean tides.
   
   Indeed, many astronomical systems transmit tidal forces as signals right across the Universe, signals that we call gravitational waves.
   
   This [relative acceleration] is entirely due to the fact that the Earth's gravitational field is em(non-uniform): it pulls with 
   different accelerations in different places.
   
   Tidal effects have this characteristic behaviour under rotations: places where the tidal effect is similar are separated by 
   a rotation of only 180 degrees. We will encounter this symmetry again when we discuss gravitational waves....
   
   The fact that the Sun and Moon happen to exert similar tidal forces on the Earth is deeply related to another exceptional "accidental" 
   fact that might at first seem to be completely unconnected, namely that eclipses occur, i.e. that the Moon and the Sun are of similar angular 
   size on the sky.
   
   Unfortunately, special and general relativity are probably the worst-named theories of modern physics. Their names convey little meaning, and 
   this sometimes causes confusion right from the start. 
   
   Because it deals with the general properties of measurements, special relativity is not really a theory about any particular physical system.
   Rather, it is a set of general principles that all the other theories of physics have to obey to deal correctly with fast-moving bodies.
   
   This produces a blueshift in relativity where there is none in the Newtonian Doppler formula. This is called the transverse Doppler shift.
   [Error: it's a redshift.]
   
   ...the more pressure a gas has, the more difficult it is to accelerate.
   
   We will have to steer a careful course between the rocky shoals of too much mathematical complexity and the becalmed waters of 
   over-simplification.
   
   The geometry of a space, like the Earth's surface, is described by the distances between places, not the coordinates of the places.
   
   Notice that this is written as the square of a number em(s). The spacetime-interval is the quantity em(s-squared), not em(s). 
   In fact, we will not often deal with em(s) itself. The reason is that em(s-squared) is not always positive, unlike distance in 
   space....You should just regard em(s-squared) as a single symbol, rather than as the square of something.
   
   Gravity itself creates gravity...Thus, gravitational fields have energy and this feeds back into the gravitational field.
   
   Since his cosmological negative pressure was to be fundamental, not tied to any accidental matter field or configuration, he needed the pressure
   to be constant in space and time, so that an observer could not pick out any special place or time by measuring the pressure. It had 
   to be a fundamental em(constant) of nature. Einstein actually introduced, instead of a fundamental pressure, a fundamental constant
   lambda, which he called the cosmological constant.
   
   Put graphically, if the nucleus were magnified to the size of an apple, then its electrons would be 1.6km (1 mile) away! All the space
   between the nucleus and its electrons is empty.
   
   ...lambda itself has the dimensions of a frequency squared.
   
   Gravitational waves produce tidal accelerations only in directions em(perpendicular) to the direction they are traveling in.
   
   This is a key concept: whatever action a gravitational wave has on matter is also the motion by which matter produces gravitational waves.
   
   However, the deformation produced by the Moon is partly directed towards the Moon (the longitudinal direction), whereas 
   gravitational waves are transverse.
   
   The deformation ellipse that is produced by a wave has the same area as the original circle,  so we say that gravitational waves in 
   general relativity are em(area-preserving). Only two polarizations are illustrated, because only two are needed. The second is obtained 
   by rotating the first by 45 degrees. Any other action of a gravitational wave in the same plane can be described by combining these two.
   
   If the particles are part of a solid body, however, then the resulting deformation will be a result of all the forces, the tidal 
   accelerations and the internal stresses of the material.
   
   When gravitational waves move through a region they do not induce differences between the rates of nearby clocks. Instead, they deform proper 
   distances...
   
   Many relativists, including at times Einstein himself, believed that gravitational waves were a mathematical illusion...
   
   A source must deform in some kind of irregular way to emit radiation. In particular, a spherical star that collapses but remains 
   spherical only deforms circles into smaller circles, and this motion will emit em(no) gravitational radiation in general relativity.
   More particularly, here is how to judge whether and in what direction a source will radiate gravitational waves. 
   Look at the source from the desired direction. Since the waves act only in directions transverse to their motion, project the source's 
   (perhaps complicated) internal motions onto the "plane of the sky", which means onto a plane perpendicular to the line-of-sight to the source.
   Then only the motions in that plane that are some combinations of the ['+' and 'x' motions] will generate gravitational waves. Moreover, 
   the detector will respond with exactly the same combination of motions: detectors simply mimic the tidal distortions of the source.
   
   The frequency of a gravitational wave is determined by the typical time-scale for the things to happen in its source.
   The upper bound on expected frequencies is about 10,000 Hz, because it is difficult to get large astronomical bodies, with masses comparable 
   to the Sun or larger, to do anything on time-scales shorter than a tenth of a millisecond or so....There is no lower bound, and in fact 
   scientists are planning detectors that reach down below [1 millihertz].
   
   So when two [black] holes merge, the result is independent of how they originally formed, and indeed it does not involve any matter at all. 
   It is pure gravity in a vacuum. The merger is pure dynamical geometry.
   
   Because gravity penetrates everywhere, the Universe is transparent to gravitational radiation, and has been so from the first moment.
   
   A telescope maker on Earth spends enormous effort to make the mirrors and lenses of a modern telescope smooth and perfectly shaped to small 
   fractions of the wavelength of light, and then the telescope is used to observe light that has come to us through a bumpy, astigmatic, partly
   absorbing natural gravitational lens!
   
   ...in this chapter we will concentrate on understanding simple lenses. We will discover the peculiar nature of the gravitational lens, 
   divergent in some regions and convergent in others; we will see why lenses magnify objects and make them brighter; we will see why there are
   in principle always an odd number of images in any lensed object, although not all of them will necessarily be bright enough to be detected; 
   and we will see how lensing can be used to measure the mass of the lens itself, and, possibly, the expansion rate of the Universe.
   
   We have shown that the surface brightness of an object is unchanged by the lens....The star occupies a larger angular size on the sky. Since
   it has the same surface brightness, we get more light in total from it.
   
   What normally happens is that there is only one image, a little brighter. Other rays, that pass on the other side of the lensing galaxy, 
   do not deflect enough to reach the astronomer...It is important to realize that for gravitational lenses, as for any other kinds of optics, the 
   location of the observer is as important for determining what is seen as are the locations of the source and the lens.
   
   ...there is a general mathematical theorem that the number of images must be odd, and that, after the first, they come in pairs: one direct, 
   the other inverted. The only exception to this theorem is if there is a gravitational field without a smooth galaxy or other smooth 
   mass distribution....in relativity, black holes create a field with no smooth center. Lensing by a black hole does not need to 
   create on odd number of images...
   
   However, our simple and apparently obvious assumption that gravity is attractive has recently been called into question by astronomical 
   observations....providing a strong indication that the expansion of the Universe is actually accelerating today...If this is the case, 
   then a singularity at the beginning of time is not an inevitable consequence of physical laws.
   
   Even if the acceleration proves in the end to be an illusion, the stimulus it has given to physicists and astronomers to come up with 
   new ideas and justify old ones has been a positive result.
   
   Their temperature, about 2.7K, is a factor of about 1000 lower than that of a plasma that can ionize hydrogen....This implies that
   the Universe has expanded by the same factor of 1000 since decoupling.
   
   In fact, we don't need to look in opposite directions: because the radiation originates so much closer to the time of the Big Bang
   than does the light given off by galaxies, the microwave radiation coming to us from directions separated by only a couple of 
   degrees on the sky is coming from regions that would have had no knowledge of one another at the time the radiation was emitted.
   
   But what is intriguing about this is that there is only one Universe, so the Universe really does have a preferred rest frame.
   This is the frame in which the mass in the Universe is at rest, on average....This rest frame is easily the best for describing 
   the physics of the Universe.
   
   The expansion of the Universe is an observable fact precisely em(because) ordinary matter does not expand with it.
   
   ...the clumpiness of dark matter helps accelerate the formation of structure in the evolving Universe.
   
   In particular, there seems to be single length-scale on which missing gravity takes over from Newtonian or Einsteinian gravity.
   This is not surprising if one accepts that the missing gravity is created by missing mass: each galaxy or cluster condensed 
   around an individual clump of dark matter, and since these clumps are random, the gravity they create will be different from 
   galaxy to galaxy and cluster to cluster.
   
   Notice first that a space that is fully isotropic has to be homogeneous.
   
   The general rule is that if the universe model is closed then angular diameters decrease less rapidly with distance than in a flat 
   universe, and if the model is open they decrease more rapidly.
   
   The origin, and even the nature, of these [ultra-high energy] cosmic-ray particles is a complete mystery. 
   Maybe their sources are dark and represent new physics, or maybe the particles themselves are new.  
 }
}

Susskind, Leonard {
  Youtube, Closer To Truth {
    Black holes are objects which belong to both regimes [the small and the large]. 
    They're big, and they're heavy, but they have quantum properties. In fact, they are very quantum mechanical objects.
  }
}

Hartle, J. B. {
 General Relativity in the Undergraduate Physics Curriculum (2008) {
   Yet, paradoxically, general relativity - so well established, so important for several branches of physics, and so 
   simple in its basic conception - is often not represented anywhere in the undergraduate physics curriculum.
   
   It is probably fruitless to speculate on why a subject as basic, accessible, and important as general relativity is not taught 
   more widely as part of the undergraduate physics curriculum. Limited time, limited resources, inertia, tradition, and 
   misconceptions may all play a role.    
   
   To exhibit a spacetime geometry, the only 'new math' ideas required are the metric and its relation to distances in space and time.
   
   The simplest spacetimes are the most physically relevant.   
 }
}

Goenner, Hubert {
  # https://archive.org/details/arxiv-1607.03319
  A Golden Age of General Relativity? (2016) {
    Unlike in Maxwells theory, the equations of motion in the gravitational field cannot be postulated 
    independently of the field equations (Einstein-Infeld-Hoffmann).
    
    The history of general relativity before the 1920s is not taken into account by many narrations. Besides Einstein and 
    his entourage, and a few researchers in Berlin, Leiden and Vienna, very few studied general relativity,
    particularly in France, England and the United States. 
  }
 
}



Ellis, G. F. R {
  # https://archive.org/details/arxiv-1509.01772/page/n3/mode/2up?view=theater
  100 Years of Relativity (2015){
    Literally hundreds of exact solutions of the full non-linear field equations are now known, despite their complexity.
    The most important ones are the Schwarzschild and Kerr solutions, determining the geometry of the solar system and of black holes, 
    and the Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker solutions, which are basic to cosmology. 
    Perturbations of these solutions make them the key to astrophysical applications.
    
    This concept of geometry as dynamically determined by its matter content necessarily leads to the non-linearity of both 
    the equations and the physics. This results in the need for new methods of study of these solutions; standard physics 
    methods based on the assumption of linearity will not work in general.
    
    The field equations of classical general relativity do not automatically prevent causality violation: so various causality 
    conditions have been proposed as extra conditions to be imposed in addition to the Einstein equations, the most physically 
    relevant being stable causality (no closed timelike lines exist even if the spacetime is perturbed).
    
    Studying the conformal structure of a spacetime is greatly facilitated by using conformal diagrams. Penrose pioneered this method 
    and showed that one can rescale the conformal coordinates so that the boundary of spacetime at infinite distance is represented 
    at a finite coordinate value, hence one can represent the entire spacetime and its boundary in this way. For example Minkowski 
    space has null infinities I- and I+ for incoming and outgoing null geodesics, an infinity i0 for spacelike geodesics, and past 
    and future infinities i-, i+ for timelike geodesics, and, perhaps surprisingly, the points i0, i- and i+ have to be identified. 
    Penrose diagrams are now a standard tool in general relativity studies, particularly in cosmology, where they make the structure 
    of particle horizons and visual horizons very clear, and in studying black holes.
    
    The situation was totally transformed by a highly innovative paper by Roger Penrose in 1965 that used global methods and causal 
    analysis to prove that singularities will occur in gravitational collapse situations where closed trapped surfaces occur, 
    a causality condition is satisfied, and suitable energy conditions are satisfied by the matter and 
    fields present...Penrose's paper proved that the occurrence of black hole singularities is not due to special symmetries, but is generic.
    
    John Wheeler emphasized that existence of spacetime singularities - an edge to spacetime, where not just space, time, and matter 
    cease to exist, but even the laws of physics themselves no longer apply - is a major crisis for physics.
    This is of course a prediction of the classical theory. It is still not known if quantum gravity solves this issue or not.
    
    Because the curvature of spacetime allows quite different global properties than in flat spacetime, it
    is possible for closed timelike lines to occur.   
    Because it allows for a beginning and end to spacetime, where not just matter but even spacetime and the laws of physics 
    cease to exist, it radically alters our views on the nature of existence.
    
    [The Kerr solution] is of considerable importance because most astrophysical objects are rotating. There is one important 
    difference from Schwarzschild: while we can construct exact interior solutions to match the Schwarszchild exterior solution, 
    that is not the case for the Kerr solution. It has a complex and fascinating structure that is still giving new insights.
    
    The [Schwarzschild] singularities are spacelike boundaries to spacetime (one in the future and one in the past), not 
    timelike world lines as one would expect.
    
    The maximally extended Schwarszchild solution is an extraordinary discovery. The very simple looking metric 
    implies the existence of two asymptotically flat spacetime regions connected by a wormhole...and two singularities that are spatially 
    homogeneous in the limit [as r approaches 0]. There is no central worldline, as a point particle picture suggests. 
    Thus just as quantum physics implied a radical revision of the idea of a particle, so does general relativity: there
    is no general relativity version of the Newtonian idea of a point particle.
    None of this is obvious. The global topology is not optional; it follows from the way the Einstein equations for 
    this vacuum curve spacetime. And the nature of this solution emphasizes why one should always try to determine exact 
    properties of solutions in general relativity: the global properties of the linearised form of the Schwarzschild solution 
    (which does not exactly satisfy the field equations) will be radically different.
    
    However this diagram is misleading in some ways: it suggests that the central singularity is a timelike world line, which is not the case; 
    it is spacelike because it exists in the part of spacetime corresponding to region II in Figure 2.
    
    Penrose formulated the cosmic censorship hypothesis, that such horizons would indeed form in the generic case. 
    This conjecture is still unresolved...
    
    Much effort has been extended in showing that the Kerr solution is the likely final state of gravitational collapse of a rotating object. 
    Work by Hawking, Carter, Robinson and others shows this indeed seems to be the case.
    
    ...the black hole entropy is proportional to the area of its event horizon divided by the Planck area...
    
    [Black holes] were discovered theoretically as an unexpected consequence of the maximal extensions of the Schwarzschild solution.
    
    [Black holes] have no analogue in Newtonian gravitational theory because there is no limit to the speed of propagation of 
    signals in that theory (where the speed of light plays no special role).
    
    These space times [FLRW in cosmology] are conformally flat: Cabcd = 0 (there is no free gravitational field, 
    so no tidal forces or gravitational waves occur in these models).
    
    A key finding is the existence of limits both to causation, represented by particle horizons, and to observations, represented by visual horizons....
    Much confusion about their nature was cleared up by Rindler in a classic paper, with further clarity coming from use of Penrose causal 
    diagrams for these models. This showed that particle horizons would occur if and only if the initial singularity was spacelike. 
    There are many statements in the literature that such horizons represent motion of galaxies away from us at the speed of light, 
    but that is not the case; they occur due to the integrated behaviour of light from the start of the universe to the present day,
    with the visual horizon, determined by the most distant matter we can detect by electromagnetic radiation, lying inside the particle horizon. 
    This is why the visual horizon size can be 42 billion light years in an Einstein de Sitter model with a Hubble scale of 14 billion years.
    
    Cosmological models started off as purely geometrical, but then a major realisation was that standard physics could be applied to the properties of 
    matter in the early universe [hot big bang, nucleosynthesis].
    
    These [cosmological] models are the opposite of the Schwarzschild vacuum solution. Those models represent the dynamics of pure vacuum 
    (there is no matter tensor); these models represent the dynamics of spacetime governed purely by matter (there is no free gravitational field).
    
    It is now broadly agreed that there was indeed such a period of inflation in the very early universe but the details are not clear: 
    there are over 100 different variants...  
    
    The real universe is only approximately a Robertson-Walker spacetime. Structure formation in an expanding universe can be studied by 
    using linearly perturbed FLRW models at early times, plus numerical simulations at later times when the inhomogeneities have gone non-linear.
    
    A key realisation was that introduction of a cosmological constant would allow a cold dark matter scenario to match observations 
    of an almost flat universe.
    
    The puzzles are that we do not know the nature of the inflaton, for which there are over 100 models; we do not know the nature of 
    the dark matter that is indicated to exist by dynamical studies, and is far more abundant than baryonic matter; 
    and we do not know the nature of the dark energy causing an acceleration of the expansion of the universe at late times. 
    It is possible that some of these issues may be indicating we need a different theory of gravity than general relativity, 
    for example MOND or a scalar-tensor theory.
    
    Gravitational waves can carry energy, momentum, and information...
    
    The theory of gravitational waves extends the idea of transverse wave propagation from the spin-1 field of electromagnetism 
    (Maxwells theory) to the spin 2 field of gravitation. They are an essentially relativistic phenomenon: they cannot occur in 
    Newtonian gravitational theory. Gravitational waves can carry energy and arbitrary information, and indeed convey information 
    to us from the earliest history of the universe that we can access. They provide the ultimate limit of our possible access to 
    knowledge about the early universe.
    
    However if one demands only second order equations in four dimensions and with one spacetime metric, general relativity 
    is the unique gravitational theory based in Riemannian geometry, as shown by Lovelock. The theory was derived not because 
    of experiment, but as the result of pure thought; but it has survived all experimental tests...There is no observational 
    or experimental reason to modify or abandon the field equations. However there is a significant problem in terms of the relation
    of general relativity to quantum field theory calculations that predict [the] existence of a vacuum energy density vastly greater
    than the observed value of the cosmological constant.
  }   
}

Newton, I. {
  Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1729) {
    ...I frame no hypothesis; for whatever is not deduced from the phenomena is to be called an hypothesis; and hypotheses, whether metaphysical 
    or physical, whether of occult qualities or mechanical, have no place in experimental philosophy.
    
    And to us it is enough that gravity does really exist, and acts according to the laws which we have explained, and abundantly serves 
    to account for all the motions of the celestial bodies, and of our sea. 
  }
}

D'Inverno, R. {
  Introducing Einstein's Relativity (1992){
    
    # he defines the Lorentz factor using the letter beta, not gamma!
    # he distinguishes two speeds: the speed of K' in K, and the speed of a particle in K
     
    I am sure colleagues know the caricature of the conventional lecture: notes are copied from the lecturer's notebook to the 
    student's notebook without their going through the heads of either - a definition which is perhaps too close for comfort.
    I was converted at an early stage to the desirability of providing students with printed notes. The main advantage is that 
    it frees up the lecture period from the time-consuming process of note-copying, and the time released can be used more 
    effectively for developing and explaining the course at a rate which the students are able to cope with.
    
    In the mid-1970s, there were very few undergraduate courses in general relativity in existence in the UK.
    
    In fact, the essence of the special theory of relativity is contained in the Lorentz transformations.
    
    We shall call individuals equipped with a clock and a measuring rod or ruler em(observers)....However, the approach 
    of the k-calculus is to dispense with the rigid ruler and use radar methods for measuring distances.
    
    First of all, [the co-ordinate free approach] requires much more of a mathematical background, which in turn takes time to develop.
    The other disadvantage is that, for all its elegance, when one wants to do a real calculation with tensors, as one 
    frequently needs to, then recourse has to be made to indices.
    
    ...it is only the differentials and not the coordinates themselves which have the tensorial character.
    
    In short, a tensor equation which holds in one coordinate system necessarily holds in em(all) coordinate systems...Put 
    another way, tensorial equations are coordinate-independent. This is something that the index-free or coordinate-free 
    approach makes clear from the outset.
    
    As in the case with vectors and vector fields in vector analysis, the distinction between a tensor and a tensor field
    is not always made compeletely clear.
    
    The key idea is to interpret the vector field as an operator which maps [a] real-valued function into [another] real-valued function.
    
    This is an invariant division of events which all observers agree upon. This follows because of the invariance of eta-ab under
    Lorentz transformations, which means that null cones get mapped onto null cones.
    
    As we have seen, Minkowski space-time admits the Poincar group as its invariance group.
    
    For example, the principle of covariance is considered by some authors (e.g. Bondi, Fock) to be empty, whereas there are others 
    (e.g. Anderson) who believe it possible to derive general relativity more or less solely from this principle.
    There is fairly general agreement that the principle of equivalence is the key principle.
    
    One school of thought describes them as apparent or fictitious forces which arise in non-inertial frames of reference....
    We shall adopt the attitude that if you judge them by their effects then they are very real forces. For, 
    after all, inertial forces cause astronauts to black-out in rocket ships and flywheels to break under 
    centrifugal effects.
    
    The point of these thought experiments is that the presence of a genuine gravitational field, as distinct from an 
    inertial field, is verified by the observation of the em(variation) of the field rather than 
    by the observation of the field itself.
  }
 
}

Peebles, P. J. E. {
  Principles of Physical Cosmology (1993){
    ...observations now reach gravitationally lensed objects, and objects at redshifts so high that they are viewed through
    the gravitational lens of the universe itself in a way that is not trivially computed by symmetry arguments.
    
    Since the components of a vector thus depend on the coordinate labelling, they have no absolute significance; 
    observables are scalars constructed out of vectors and tensors.
    
    Now we will define two classes of vectors, called covariant and contravariant (for reasons that are lost in the mists of time).
    
    ...the definition of [ds-squared] is that if [it] is positive, ds is the time interval measured by an observer on a world line
     that passes between the events; and if [ds-squared] is negative, [the absolute value of ds] is the distance between the events
     measured by an observer who is moving such that they are seen to happen simultaneously.
     
     The conclusion is that we can choose the coordinate labels so the ordinary line element of special relativity applies in the
     neighborhood of a chosen point, with the metric tensor equal to the Minkowski form, and the first derivatives of the metric 
     tensor equal to zero. We will see in the next section that this represents the locally orthogonal coordinate system that a freely
     falling observer would set up using proper physical rods and clocks. If all the second derivatives of the metric tensor cannot 
     be eliminated, they describe the tidal field that causes the relative gravitational acceleration of neighboring freely moving 
     test particles, and one says spacetime is curved.
  }
}

Minkowski, Hermann {
 Address in Cologne (1908) {
   Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will 
   preserve an independent reality. 
 }
}

Buskes and van Rooij {
  Topological Spaces (1997) {
    We see that the two theories are really the same.
    Once one has accepted [the statements] I, II, III, and IV as axioms, the choice between [axiom] V and [the Connectedness Theorem] CT is just a matter of taste. 
    In this sense, the axiom systems I-II-III-IV-V and I-II-III-IV-CT are "equivalent".
  }
}

Wheeler, John {
  A Journey Into Gravity and Spacetime (1990) {
   The scope and power of this century's view of gravity and spacetime is seen nowhere more dramatically than in its prediction of the expansion of the 
   universe. To have predicted, and predicted successfully against all expectation, a phenomenon so fantastic is the greatest token yet of our 
   power to understand this strange and beautiful universe.
   
   Gauss had found that the curvature in the neighborhood of a given point of a specified two-dimensional space geometry is given by a single number.
   Riemann found that six numbers are needed to describe the curvature of a three-dimensional space at a given point, and that 20 numbers 
   are required for a four-dimensional geometry.
   
   Why then did he [Riemann] not, half a century before Einstein, arrive at a geometric account of gravity? No obstacle in his way was greater than 
   this: he thought only of space and the curvature of space, whereas Einstein, as we will soon learn, discovered that he had to deal with 
   spacetime and the curvature of spacetime.
   
   Two ideas are central to Einstein's conception of gravity. The first is free-float. The second is spacetime curvature.
   
   em(General relativity) is the name he gave to the later idea that gravitational fall is really free float. Today it is more natural to 
   describe his teaching as Einstein's geometric theory of gravity.
   
   That innocent but ambiguous term [observer] has created endless confusion for more than half a century. It fails to distinguish between 
   two totally different concepts of observer. One is right. The other is wrong. The camera epitomizes the wrong idea - wrong because it is 
   not located where the action is.
   
   Felix Klein (1849-1925) enunciated in his 1872 lectures at the University of Erlangen what was to prove one of the most fruitful theses
   in all of mathematics: one kind of geometry is distinguished from another by the kinds of quantities that are invariant in it.
   
   The right order of ideas is not first frames of reference, then spacetime. The right order is first spacetime, then frames of reference.
   
   Null interval is a feature of the geometry of spacetime totally different from anything in the geometry of space.
   
   ...a straight line makes the total distance between two points the shortest. Spacetime has quite a different geometry: a straight worldline 
   makes the total interval between two events the longest.
   
   But when a piece of iron is heated, the zigzag speed of the atoms increases; their worldlines kink more sharply. So the atoms in a heated 
   piece of iron rack up fewer clicks in a second of laboratory time than do the ones in a colder piece. And that's not talk.
   That's fact. Warming iron by just 1 degree Celcius cuts down by 7700 the number of clicks ticked off by each internal iron-atom clock 
   during a laboratory second....Pound and Rebka were able to measure that difference.
   
   With speed close enough to the speed of light, we can make the aging factor so small that while the Earth and stars age 
   50 billion years, we age 40 years.
   
   The interval is the building strut of flat spacetime, the local spacetime of a local free-float frame. It is also the building strut of
   curved spacetime, spacetime in a region where gravity is strong enough to make itself felt.
   
   And of curvature in a given locale, we need not a hundred but only six views. Those views - each of them a two-dimensional slice of the full 
   four-dimensional spacetime - I call em(plaquettes). Why are there six views, six natural choices of plaquette? Because from a spacetime of 
   four dimensions, there are six ways to select out two of those four dimensions for special attention.
   
   Like a great new sculpture, so curvature preserves its unity, strength, and beauty as we detect and measure it from three quite different 
   standpoints, called em(bending), em(transport), and em(distance).
   
   The difference in spacetime curvature inside and outside the Earth is equally striking. Inside, contractile. Outside, noncontractile.
   Noncontractile but em(tide-driving)! 
   
   In brief, where there's mass, there curvature is contractile....Contractility there is proportional to mass density there.
   
   The tide-driving curvature of spacetime grows ever weaker the more distant from the central mass. Why? It grows weaker by 
   em(dilution)...Twice the distance from the center of the mass? Then the volume over which the influence is felt is doubled in extent in all 
   three space dimensions; the volume is enlarged by a factor of 8. At that distance, spacetime bending will be diluted to one-eigth of what it is
   at the Earth's surface. More generally, and in keeping with this reasoning, the curvature falls off inversely as the cube of the distance.
   
   Of Kepler Galileo even said, "More than other people he was a person of independent genius... [but he] later pricked up his ears and became 
   interested in the action of the moon on the water, and in other occult phenomena, and similar childishness."
   
   Words promote insight.
   
   Like the time-like interval separating the positions of two events in spacetime, the length of the momenergy arrow is invariant, that is, 
   independent of the reference frame. This length measures the object's mass.
   
   However, the increase in the internal energy of agitation [heat] - and therefore in mass - is too small even for today's best instruments to 
   detect.
   
   An important principle teaches us something new every time we learn to state it in a new way.
   
   Conservation of momenergy is automatic because the forty-eight 2-D face-boundaries of the eight 3-D cube-boundaries of any 4-D spacetime 
   region self-annihilate. Within a 4-D cube or block of spacetime - a region of space examined for an interval of time - momenergy is 
   automatically conserved.
   
   The French mathematician and geometer lie Cartan (1969-1951) used his calculus of "exterior differential forms" to derive the simple 
   Einstein-Cartan equation from Einstein's much more complicated geometrodynamic field equation. Cartan's boundary of a boundary 
   geometric approach to Einstein's theory provides a wonderful simplicity.
   
   Einstein's influence law thus displays not only the grip of mass where it is on spacetime where it is. It also tells us how bent spacetime
   here grabs adjacent spacetime. Even beyond the grip of mass on spacetime, the moment-of-rotation equation reveals and rules the grip of 
   spacetime on mass. Grip em(on) mass? Yes, reaction to the grip em(of) mass! That's the other half of the story of gravity.
   That grip on mass enforces the law of conservation of momenergy. Enforces it automatically. Enforces this conservation in a subtle, clever, 
   hidden way. Enforces it via the principle that the 2-boundary of a 3-boundary of a 4-D spacetime region is zero!
   
   In that way the grip of spacetime, there and likewise anywhere, forever bars any creation - or destruction - of momenergy anywhere in spacetime.
   
   The importance of Schwarzschild geometry derives from the tendency of matter to agglomerate into masses that are spherical or nearly so.
   Its simplicity derives from its static character and its spherical symmetry.
   
   The shape of the Schwarzschild curved space geometry follows a remarably simple curve, discoverable by astonishingly simple reasoning.
   It is generated by drawing a em(parabola) about its em(directrix), another name for the axis of revolution. By this means is created a 
   curved sheet called a paraboloid.
   
   Aging incurred between the stone's takeoff and its return evidently registers the competition between two influences: first, the age 
   lengthening effect of being up there and, second, the age shortening effect of traveling there and back.
   
   In Newtonian theory, the shape of the energy hill [in the two-body problem] is a miracle. It guarantees that the time for one in-and-out 
   oscillation always agrees exactly with the time for one full 360-degree or 2-pi turn of the orbit.
   [In geometrodynamics] it takes more than the time for one 360-degree turn to go from outer extremity of the orbit to inner extremity and return.
   The curve does not close.
   
   Second, however far this traveling region of spacetime curvature has progressed, there the measure of the deformation it makes in spacetime 
   geometry has fallen off in proportion, not to the inverse square of the distance of travel away from the source, but to the em(inverse first power)
   of this distance.
   
   Then I encountered in J. Arthur Thompson the statement that the electric force in an electromagnetic wave points, not straight out from the center 
   of attraction, but transverse to that direction, and with a strength proportional to the inverse first power of the distance.
   
   Almost every feature of an electromagnetic wave transcribes itself into a corresponding feature of a gravity wave.
   
   In other words, if Alpha plunges down a boomerang shaft straight from the North Pole and at Earth's center smashes into a like mass Beta 
   zooming straight up from the South Pole, observer's on Earth's surface will find the resulting pulse of the gravitational radiation 
   strongest in the temperate latitudes of the northern and southern hemispheres but zero at the poles and zero at the equator.
   One final feature about the response of the two test masses is important. Does their line of separation lie in the plane of 
   the two reference directions [the line connecting the poles, and the line connecting the test particles to the center of the Earth]?
   Or at right angles to that plane? In the two cases the accelerations are equal in magnitude but opposite in sign.
   
   Radiation demands more, a fourth time rate of change of reduced quadrupole moment: that is, a steady rate of change of rate of change
   of rate of change of rate of change of mass nonsphericity!
   
   ...the decisive measure of source strength is not the quadrupole moment itself, bit its fourth time rate of change!
   
   Other stars contain both matter and mass. In contrast, the black hole is disembodied mass, mass without matter.
   
   The advent of the term em(black hole) in 1967 was terminologically trivial but psychologically powerful.
   
   Angular momentum, for example, can take on only one or another integer multiple of a basic unit of angular momentum. 
   ...In geometric units, where we express both mass and time in meters, this elementary quantum of angular momentum turns out to have the dimension 
   of an area...(the square of the so-called Planck length). This tiny area is an elementary quantum of area....[The entropy of a black hole], a 
   pure number, the so-called Bekenstein number, is exactly the surface area of the horizon of the black hole, divided by 4 times the elementary
   quantum of area.
   
   Bekenstein went on to explain that the surface area of a black hole is not only analogous to entropy, it is entropy, and the surface gravity of 
   a black hole (measured, for example, by the downward acceleration of a rock as it crosses the horizon) is not only analogous to temperature, it 
   is temperature. A black hole is not totally cold!
   
   Of all methods to convert bulk matter into energy, no one has ever seen evidence for a more effective process than accretion into a black hole, and 
   no one has ever come up with a more feasible scheme for one.
   
   In the expanding universe, em(only) the distance between one cluster of galaxies and another expands. Atoms don't expand. Meter sticks don't expand.
   We don't expand. 
   
   Such an expansion had already been predicted by Alexander Friedmann in 1922 on the foundation of Einstein's original simple theory.  
  }
}

Verlinde, Eric {
  # https://arxiv.org/pdf/1611.02269.pdf
  Emergent Gravity and the Dark Universe (2016) {
    
    It is an empirical fact that the missing mass problem, usually interpreted as observational evidence for dark matter, only occurs when the
    gravitational acceleration falls below a certain critical value that is of the order of a0 [the Hubble acceleration scale].
    
    The appearance of the cosmological acceleration scale a0 in galactic dynamics is striking and gives a strong hint towards an explanation 
    in terms of emergent gravity, as envisaged in [38].
    
    Our goal is to give a theoretical explanation for why the emergent laws of gravity
    differ from those of general relativity precisely when the inequality (1.4) is obeyed.
    We will find that this criterion is directly related to the presence of the volume law
    contribution to the entanglement entropy. At scales much smaller than the Hubble
    radius gravity is in most situations well described by general relativity, because the
    entanglement entropy is still dominated by the area law of the vacuum. But at large
    distances and long time scales the enormous de Sitter entropy in combination with the
    extremely slow thermal dynamics lead to modifications to these familiar laws. We will
    determine these modifications and show that precisely when the surface mass density
    falls below the value (1.3) the reaction force due to the thermal contribution takes over
    from the normal gravity force caused by the area law.
    
    The central idea of this paper is that the volume law contribution to the entanglement
    entropy, associated with the positive dark energy, turns the otherwise "stiff" geometry
    of spacetime into an elastic medium.
    
    Hence, although we derived the same relation as modified Newtonian dynamics, the physics is very different.
    
    For these reasons proponents of modified newtonian dynamics still have to assume a form of particle dark matter at the cluster scale.
    These discrepancies can be significantly reduced and perhaps completely explained away in our theoretical description.
     
    Most of the baryonic mass in clusters is contained in X-ray emitting gas, which extends all the way to the outer parts of the cluster.
    
    This means that the 'missing mass problem' in clusters is significantly reduced and given the uncertainty about the amount of baryons, possibly entirely removed. 

    Since up to now there appeared to be no evidence that general relativity or Newtonian gravity could be wrong at the scales in question, 
    the most generally accepted point of view is that these observations indicate that our universe contains an enormous amount of a yet unknown 
    form of dark matter particle. However, the discrepancy between the observed gravitational force and the one caused by the visible baryonic
    matter is so enormous that it is hard to claim that these observations provide evidence
    for the validity of general relativity or Newtonian gravity in these situations. Purely
    based on the observations it is more appropriate to say that these familiar gravitational
   theories can only be saved by assuming the presence of dark matter. Therefore, without further knowledge, the evidence in favour of dark matter 
   is just as much evidence for the possible breakdown of the currently known laws of gravity.
   
    The real reason why most physicists believe in the existence of particle dark matter
    is not the observations, but because there was no theoretical evidence nor a conceptual
    argument for the breakdown of these laws at the scales where the new phenomena
    are being observed. It has been the aim of this paper to provide a theoretical and
    conceptual basis for the claim that this situation changes when one regards gravity as
    an emergent phenomena. We have shown that the emergent laws of gravity, when one
    takes into account the volume law contribution to the entropy, start to deviate from
    the familiar gravitational laws precisely in those situations where the observations tell
    us they do. We have only made use of the natural constants of nature, and provided
    reasonably straightforward arguments and calculations to derive the scales and the
    behavior of the observed phenomena. Especially the natural appearance of the acceleration scale a0 should in our view be seen 
    as a particularly convincing aspect of our approach.
    
    Our main conclusion therefore is: The observed phenomena that are currently attributed to dark matter are the
    conesquence of the emergent nature of gravity and are caused by an elastic response
    due to the volume law contribution to the entanglement entropy in our universe.
    
    In order to explain the observed phenomena we did not postulate the existence of
    a dark matter particle, nor did we modify the gravitational laws in an ad hoc way.
    Instead we have to tried to understand their origin and their mutual relation by taking
    seriously the theoretical indications coming from string theory and black hole physics
    that spacetime and gravity are emergent. We believe this approach and the results we
    obtained tell us that the phenomena associated with dark matter are an unavoidable
    and logical consequence of the emergent nature of spacetime itself. The net effect
    should be that in our conventional framework one has to add a dark component to
    the stress energy tensor, which behaves very much like the cold dark matter needed
    to explain structure formation, but which in its true origin is an intrinsic property
    of spacetime rather than being caused by some unknown particle. Indeed, we have
    argued that the observed dark matter phenomena are a remnant, a memory effect, of
    the emergence of spacetime together with the ordinary matter in it.
    
    In particular, we have made clear why the apparent dark matter behaves exactly in
    the right way to explain the phenomenological success of modified Newtonian dynamics,
    as well as its failures, without the introduction of any freely adjustable parameters. We
    have found that in many, but not all, aspects the apparent dark matter behaves similar
    to as one would expect from particle dark matter.    
  }  
}


# https://phys.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Astronomy__Cosmology/Supplemental_Modules_(Astronomy_and_Cosmology)/Cosmology/Carlip/Topology_and_general_relativity
Carlip, Steve {
  The field equations of general relativity determine the geometry of spacetime in terms of the matter content. They do not, in general, determine the topology.
  The two aren't completely independent; choices of geometry and topology must be compatible, and this places some restrictions on possible spacetimes.
   
  One of the interesting problems in modern cosmology is that of determining the topology of space in the real Universe. 
}
  
# https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7G4SqIboeig
Schuller, Frederic {
  Space-time is a four-dimensional topological manifold with a smooth atlas, carrying a torsion-free connection 
  compatible with a Lorentzian metric and a time-orientation satisfying the Einstein equations.
}

Capek, M. {
  The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics {
    The intensity of every astonishment gradually wears off; the human mind, by the sheer effect of repetition and habit, gradually
    becomes accustomed to even the strangest and least familiar ideas.
    
    It frequently happens that within one and the same mind the true grasp of the mathematical side of the theory coexists with 
    serious misapprehensions of its physical and especially its philosophical meaning....
    
    This plainly shows that the term "curvature" is essentially metaphorical, for it is based on an analogy with curvature of 
    two-dimensional surfaces.
    
    ...the law of gravitation is a generalized law of inertia.
    
    What is left of the classical definition of space as "simultaneous juxtaposition of points?" Nothing but a word with 
    misleading connotations.
    
    Yet the idea of a timeless container, in which all matter is located and in which all motion takes place, has such deep roots
    in the very structure of human imagination that it is almost impossible to get rid of it.
  }
}

Kenyon, I. R. {
  General Relativity (1990) {
    Gravitational waves are simply the vibration of space-time itself.
    
    A number of experiences familiar to modern man indicate that there is a close resemblance between the gravitational force and 
    the effects of acceleration. High-speed centrifuges generate large inertial forces which are used to separate materials from 
    liquid suspensions that would sediment only slowly, if at all, under gravity. Pilots of jet aircraft making tight turns feel 
    forces that are labelled 'g forces', and in the realm of space exploration proposals exist to build giant wheels that would
    rotate to provide an artificial gravity. These are all examples of centrifugal acceleration. Linear acceleration is less 
    readily sustained and has fewer familiar applications. However, the parallel between a linear acceleration and gravitation 
    is conceptually simpler. Einstein realized that this parallel is a principle of nature, the equivalence principle, 
    which states that a region of uniform gravitational field and a uniformly accelerating frame are equivalent. That is to say,
    there is no way to distinguish between them provided that measurements do not extend beyond the region of uniformity.
    
    ...the motion of a neutral test body released at a given point in space-time is independent of its composition. 
    This statement is known as the em(weak equivalence principle).
    
    Einstein generalized the [weak equivalence principle] to cover both electromagnetic and mechanical experiments....
    In a nutshell, physics is the same in all freely falling frames.
    
    For most purposes we can ignore the distinction and include the pseudo-Riemannian spaces with the Riemannian spaces.
    
    # Fig 6.4 is a nice summary, on page 70, of when Christoffel symbols and/or R vanishes.
    
    # good diagram 5.1 on page 51, for contravariant versus covariant.
    
    With rectangular Cartesian coordinates in Euclidean space the distinction between vector and covector components disappears, 
    which explains why covector components are not usually used in Newtonian mechanics.
    
    # p79 good summary of the physical meaning of the energy-momentum tensor
    
    T-mu-nu [the energy-momentum tensor] is the flow of the mu-th component of the four-momentum along the nu-direction.
    
    It is well known that the pressure inside a star resists the gravitational collapse, and yet it now looks as if pressure can, by 
    virtue of contributing to a component of the stress-energy tensor, hasten gravitational collapse. This is indeed the case, and pressure
    contributes to the contraction of sufficiently massive stars to black holes.
    
    Curiously, the cosmological constant is once again in vogue. Quantum theory has taught us that the vacuum is not a featureless void 
    but is continuously disturbed by the particle-anti-particle pair creation and annihilation and that this endows the vacuum with energy. 
    A non-zero cosmological constant no longer seems at all unreasonable.
  }
}

Carroll, Sean {
  Spacetime and Geometry (2004){
    General relativity is the most beautiful physical theory ever invented.
    
    The essential idea is perfectly straightforward: while most forces of nature are represented by fields defined on spacetime (such
    as the electromagnetic field, or the short-range fields characteristic of subnuclear forces), gravity is inherent in 
    spacetime itself. In particular, what we experience as "gravity" is a manifestation of the curvature of spacetime.
    
    The interval is defined to be delta-s^2, not the square root of this quantity.
    
    The notion of em(acceleration) in special relativity has a bad reputation, for no good reason...In particular, there is no truth 
    to the rumor that SR is unable to deal with accelerated trajectories, and general relativity must be invoked.
    
    Such a metric, in which all of the eigenvalues are positive, is called Euclidean, while those...which feature a single minus sign 
    are called Lorentzian.
    
    ...there is no such thing as a cross product between four-vectors.
    
    This is why it is rarely necessary to write the basis vectors and dual vectors explicitly; the components do all of the work.
    
    A remarkable property of the above tensors - the metric, the inverse metric, the Kronecker delta, and the Levi-Civita symbol - is that,
    even though they all transform according to the tensor transformation law, their components remain unchanged in any inertial 
    coordinate system in flat spacetime. In fact, these are the only tensors with this property.
    
    The metric, as a (0,2) tensor, is a machine that acts on two vectors (or two copies of the same vector) to produce a number.
    
    It turns out to be much more convenient to take this as the mass once and for all, rather than thinking of mass depending on velocity.
    
    As mentioned at the beginning of this section, general relativity itself is a classical field theory, in which the dynamical field is 
    the metric tensor. It is nevertheless fair to think of GR as somehow different; for the most part other classical field theories rely on 
    the existence of a pre-existing geometry, whereas in GR the geometry is determined by the equations of motion.
    
    A general definition of [the energy-momentum tensor] T-mu-nu is "the flux of four-momentum p-mu across a surface of constant x-nu."
    
    Gravity is special. In the context of general relativity, we ascribe this specialness to the fact that the dynamical field 
    giving rise to gravitation is the metric tensor describing the curvature of spacetime itself, rather than some additional 
    field propagating through spacetime; this was Einstein's profound insight. The physical principle that led him to this idea 
    was the universality of the gravitational interaction, as formalized by the Principle of Equivalence.
    
    The [Weak Equivalence Principle] states that the inertial mass and gravitational mass of any object are equal.
    
    This suggests an equivalent formulation of the WEP: there exists a preferred class of trajectories through spacetime, known as 
    inertial (or "freely-falling") trajectories, on which unaccelerated particles travel - where unaccelerated means 
    "subject only to gravity".
    
    The WEP can therefore be stated as follows: The motion of freely-falling particles are the same in a gravitational field and a 
    uniformly accelerated frame, in small enough regions of spacetime.
    
    This reasonable extrapolation became what is now known as the Einstein Equivalence Principle, or EEP: In small enough regions of 
    spacetime, the [nongravitational] laws of physics reduce to those of special relativity; it is impossible to detect the existence of a gravitational
    field by means of local experiments.
    
    Then the Strong Equivalence Principle (SEP) is defined to include all of the laws of physics, gravitational and otherwise.
    
    The solution is to retain the notion of inertial frames, but to discard the hope that they can be uniquely extended throughout 
    space and time. Instead we can define locally inertial frames, those that follow the motion of individual freely falling particles 
    in small enough regions of spacetime. (Every time we say "small enough regions", purists should imagine a limiting procedure in which 
    we take the appropriate spacetime volume to zero.)
    
    C-infinity maps are sometimes called em(smooth).
    
    Roughly speaking, an open set is the interior of some (n-1)-dimensional closed surface (or the union of several such interiors).
    
    Most manifolds cannot be covered with just one chart.
    
    Just as the partial derivatives along coordinate axes provide a natural basis for the tangent space, the gradients of the coordinate
    functions x-mu provide a natural basis for the cotangent space.
    
    Unfortunately, the partial derivative of a tensor is not, in general, a new tensor. The gradient, which is the partial derivative of a 
    scalar, is an honest (0,1) tensor, as we have seen. But the partial derivative of higher-rank tensors is not tensorial....
    
    The metric we use in general relativity cannot be used to define a topology, but it will have other uses.
    
    In fact our notation "ds^2" does not refer to the differential of anything, or the square of anything; it's just convenient 
    shorthand for the metric tensor, a multilinear map from two vectors to the real numbers.
    
    ...it turns out that at any point p there exists a coordinate system in which [the g's] take their canonical form and the first 
    derivatives [of the g's] all vanish...Such coordinates are known as locally inertial coordinates...
    
    The usual trick is to take a question of physical interest, answer it in the context of locally inertial coordinates, and then 
    express that answer in a coordinate-independent form.
    
    All the ways in which curvature manifests itself rely on something called a "connection", which gives us a way of relating vectors in the
    tangent spaces of nearby points.
    
    ...a connection that is symmetric in its lower indices is known as "torsion-free".
    
    Our claim is therefore that there is exactly one torsion-free connection on a given manifold that is compatible with some given metric on 
    that manifold.
    
    The last thing we need to mention is that converting partial derivatives into covariant derivatives is not always necessary in order 
    to construct well-defined tensors; in particular, the exterior derivative and the vector-field commutator are both well-defined in terms
    of partials, essentially because both involve an anti-symmetrization that cancels the nontensorial piece of the partial derivative
    transformation law.
    
    ...we must simply learn to live with the fact that two vectors can only be compared in a natural way if they are elements of the same
    tangent space. For example, two particles passing by each other have a well-defined relative velocity, which cannot be greater than 
    the speed of light. But two particles at different points on a curved manifold do not have any well-defined notion of relative 
    velocity - the concept simply makes no sense.
    
    Since this phenomenon bears such a close resemblance to the conventional Doppler effect due to relative motion, we are very tempted to 
    say that the galaxies are "receding away from us" at a speed defined by their redshift. At a rigorous level this is nonsense, what 
    Wittgenstein would call a "grammatical mistake" - the galaxies are not receding, since the notion of their velocity with respect to
    us is not well-defined. What is actually happening is that the metric of spacetime between us and the galaxies has changed (the 
    universe has expanded) along the path of the photon from here to there, leading to an increase in the wavelength of the light.
    
    ...the demand that the tangent vector be parallel-transported actually constrains the parameterization of the curve, specifically to one
    related to the proper time...
    
    Often the case is that between two points on a manifold there is more than one geodesic.
    
    Geodesics provide a convenient way of mapping the tangent space em(Tp) of a point em(p) to a region of the manifeld that contains em(p),
    called the exponential map. This map in turn defines a set of coordinates for this region that are automatically the locally inertial 
    coordinates...
    
    ...the best way we have of defining a singularity is as a place where geodesics appear to "end", after we remove trivial cases in 
    which a part of the manifold is artificially excluded by hand.
    
    ...the cosmological redshift is em(not) a Doppler shift...
    
    ...a convention needs to be chosen for the ordering of the indices [of the Riemann tensor]. There is no agreement at all on what this 
    convention should be, so be careful.
    
    We therefore refer to an n-dimensional manifold with (n/2)(n+1) Killing vectors as a maximally symmetric space. 
    [For n=4, the number is 10 Killing vectors.] 
    
    It follows that we should be able to reconstruct the entire Riemann tensor of such a space from the Ricci scalar R...
    
    Locally, then (ignoring questions of global topology), a maximally symmetric space of given dimension and signature is fully 
    specified by R. The basic classification of such spaces is simply whether R is positive, zero, or negative, since the magnitude 
    of R represents an overall scaling of the size of the space.
    
    We know that the maximally symmetric spacetime with R=0 is simply Minkowski space. The positively curved maximally symmetric spacetime 
    is called de Sitter space, while that with negative curvature is imaginatively labeled anti-de Sitter space. 
      
    When people say that GR is diffeomorphism invariant, more likely than not they have one of two (closely related) concepts in mind: 
    the theory is free of "prior geometry", and there is no em(preferred) coordinate system for spacetime.
    
    Furthermore, the energy-momentum tensor will generally involve the metric as well.
    
    The nonlinearity if general relativity is worth a remark...In GR the gravitational field couples to itself...The nonlinearity of 
    Einstein's equation is a reflection of the back-reaction of gravity on itself.
    
    There is nothing unique about [the nonlinearity] of gravity; it is shared by most gauge theories, such as quantum chromodynamics, the 
    theory of the strong interactions. Electromagnetism is actually the exception...
    
    A characteristic feature of general relativity is that the source for the gravitational field is the entire energy-momentum tensor.
    In nongravitational physics, only em(changes) in energy from one state to another are measurable; the normalization of the energy 
    is arbitrary...This behavior opens up the possibility of vacuum energy: an energy density characteristic of empty space.
    
    The terms "cosmological constant" and "vacuum energy" are essentially interchangeable.
    
    The vacuum energy is ultimately a constant of nature in its own right.
    
    We know that there are four Killing vectors [in the Schwarzschild spacetime]: three for the spherical symmetry, and one for time translation.
    [conservation of angular momentum, and energy].
    
    The idea of a conformal diagram [Carter-Penrose diagram]...is a crucial tool for analyzing spacetimes in general relativity.
    
    Black hole solutions are characterized by a very small number of parameters, rather than the potentially infinite set of parameters 
    characterizing, say, a planet.
    
    An event horizon is a hypersurface separating those spacetime points that are connected to infinity by a timelike path from those that 
    are not.
    
    The moral of the story seems to be that typical time-dependent solutions in general relativity usually end in singularities.
    (Or begin in them; some theorems imply the existence of cosmological singularities, such as the Big Bang.) This represents something 
    of a problem for GR, in the sense that the theory doesn't really apply to the singularities themselves, whose existence therefore 
    represents an incompleteness of description. The traditional attitude toward this issue is to hope that a sought-after quantum 
    theory of gravity will somehow resolve the singularities of classical GR.
    
    Cosmic censorship conjecture: Naked singularities cannot form in gravitational collapse from generic, initially nonsingular 
    states in an asymptotically flat spacetime obeying the dominant energy condition. A naked singularity is one from which signals can 
    reach I+; that is, one that is not hidden behind an event horizon. Notice that the conjecture refers to the formation of naked 
    singularities, not their existence; there are certainly solutions in which spacelike naked singularities exist in the past
    (such as the Schwarzschild white hole) or timelike singularities exist for all times (such as in super-extremal 
    charged black holes)...The requirement that the initial data be in some sense "generic" is important, as numerical experiments 
    have shown that finely-tuned initial conditions are able to give rise to naked singularities. A precise proof of some form of the 
    cosmic censorship conjecture remains one of the outstanding problems of classical relativity.
    
    The usefulness of homogeneity and isotropy is that they imply that a space is maximally symmetric. Think of isotropy as invariance under 
    rotations, and homogeneity as invariance under translations, suitably generalized. Then homogeneity and isotropy together imply that a space 
    has its maximum possible number of Killing vectors.
    
    The conformal diagram of de Sitter space will simply be a representation of the patch of the Einstein static universe to which 
    de Sitter is conformally related.
    
    Thus, anti-de Sitter space is conformally related to half of the Einstein static universe.  
  }
}